TODO port to chapters

## Asides

######## Aside 1

I am ignoring Warde's point that readability is desirable, but not
legibility (as a larger and bolder type might be more legible, but not
more readable). This apparent contradiction stems from the distinction
(already described) between individual characters and continuous text.
\[[return](#Aside1)\]

######## Aside 2

The ways in which beginning readers are taught to read are influenced by
the different theoretical positions and assumptions or beliefs about how
we read, which have changed over time, influenced by research findings.
Letter-by-letter decoding is taught through practice in phonics; the
whole-word method involves memorising some words; the whole language
method encourages children to use story and sentence context to guess
the next word (which will only work some of the time).
\[[return](#Aside2)\]

######## Aside 3

Deciding what to prioritise is something you encounter when designing.
For example, you may decide to make a text appear less daunting by using
generous space between lines. This results in what appears to be a
longer text (more pages to turn or more scrolling or tapping). Therefore
the text may actually seem to be more, rather than less, daunting.
\[[return](#Aside3)\]

######## Aside 4

Even the founding editor of the oldest peer-reviewed design journal
(*Visible Language*, starting out as *The Journal of Typographic
Research*) was fed up with some comparisons of typefaces:\
'How many studies must we have on the comparative legibility of standard
reader typefaces --- Baskerville versus Times Roman versus Garamond
versus Gill Sans?' (Wrolstad, 1970, p37) \[[return](#Aside4)\]

######## Aside 5

The applied psychologist Poulton (1965) was aware of this confound and
adjusted sizes accordingly. His example has not been followed by all
researchers, possibly due to a lack of awareness or technical
limitations. \[[return](#Aside5)\]

######## Aside 6

More recently, a newer chart ([logMAR](\l)) has been introduced into
clinical practice, having been used initially as a research tool (Bailey
and Lovie, 1976). The chart is designed to ensure that the letters are
of almost equal legibility, each row has the same number of letters, and
consistent letter and line spacing. These adjustments to the Snellen
chart reflect the researchers' knowledge of the influence of crowding.
Other differences relate to the scaling of letter size.

The SLOAN font (see below) is used in both the Snellen and logMAR
charts. Louise Sloan designed ten letters (CDHKNORSVZ), a set of
[optotypes](#optotypes) (Sloan, 1959). \[[return](#Aside6)\]

> ![A picture containing logo Description automatically
> generated](media/image3.jpeg){width="4.435in"
> height="0.9833333333333333in"}

The SLOAN letters above come from the font file created by Denis Pelli
based on Sloan's specifications[^12]. Pelli includes the complete
uppercase alphabet, not just the 10 letters. The height and width of
letters are equal to the nominal point size (11 point in this example)
and adjoining characters touch.

######## Aside 7

In this study (Thiessen *et al*., 2015) the legibility of the typefaces
was determined by the researchers and based on criteria that combine
research findings and practical experience and expertise of
typographers. \[[return](#Aside7)\]

######## Aside 8

These studies are not necessarily couched as legibility research; often
emerging from a computer science/ergonomics/Human Computer Interaction
(HCI) environment, they may be regarded as usability studies.
\[[return](#Aside8)\]

######## Aside 9

A comparison of five e-readers and one paper book found very similar
reading behaviour, measured by eye movements. There was also a
suggestion that e-readers might improve legibility as readers are able
to adjust font size (Siegenthaler, Wurtz, Bergamin, and Groner, 2011).
\[[return](#Aside9)\]

######## Aside 10

These studies (and others involving Perea) were carried out in Spanish,
whereas all other research cited uses English, unless stated otherwise.
\[[return](#Aside10)\]

######## Aside 11

In psychology, and science in general, this would not be considered the
most parsimonious explanation, i.e. not the simplest. However, it would
be interesting to test. \[[return](#Aside11)\]

######## Aside 12

If you are wondering why the percentages add up to more than 100% (as I
was initially), this is because some letters are ambiguous in both their
lower and upper parts. \[[return](#Aside12)\]

######## Aside 13

There are differences between Mexico and the UK in the typography of
signs in the environment. For example, traffic signs in Mexico are in
upper case, whereas the UK changed from all capitals to lower case with
initial capitals. However, this is unlikely to affect our familiarity
with reading continuous text. \[[return](#Aside13)\]

######## Aside 14

The authors interpret this result as indicating that bold affects how
quickly we can get from the letter level to the word detector level
where we match the letters against stored words (lexical access).
\[[return](#Aside14)\]

######## Aside 15

This is interesting for the psychology of reading because it suggests
that the typographic features of the letters and words have an influence
at a semantic level, when we have accessed the meaning of the word.
\[[return](#Aside15)\]

######## Aside 16

Corbel was chosen to represent a high level of appropriateness, Tempus
Sans was considered neutral, and Vivaldi was chosen to represent a low
level of appropriateness. The results indicated that Corbel led to the
impression that the author of the CV was more knowledgeable, believable,
professional, mature, and experienced. \[[return](#Aside16)\]

######## Aside 17

Vertical rivers, where interword spaces line up with each other on
successive lines, may not be a problem except aesthetically. Studies of
eye movements suggest that we don't use the text of the next line to
preview what is coming next (Pollatsek, Raney, Lagasse, and Rayner,
1993). I am not entirely certain who first used the term 'rivers' but it
occurs in Dowding (1966, p5), who also refers to aesthetic
considerations, rather than legibility. \[[return](#Aside17)\]

######## Aside 18

The studies underpinning this discussion were carried out with desktop
computers and scrolling using up and down cursor or arrow keys (see
image). However, the formatting of text (line length and hence number of
lines) is also relevant to scrolling through text on mobile devices.
\[[return](#Aside18)\]

![](media/image4.jpeg){width="1.8818897637795275in"
height="0.7716535433070866in"}

######## Aside 19

This study included two versions of the single column: one which used
scrolling to move through the text and one which used a single keystroke
to get to the next screenful of text (described as 'paged'). The
three-column format was presented only in a paged version as columns can
only practically be read to the bottom of the screen. The single column
using paging was the one read fastest. \[[return](#Aside19)\]

######## Aside 20

Williams and Spyridakis (1992) are aware of the difference between

-   determining whether headings are the same or different, where
    variation on more dimensions will look more dissimilar

-   how headings relate to each other and interpreting whether size is
    more important than position, case or underlining

But their test material may have lost sight of normal practice, which
would not use 16 levels of heading and headings as large as 57 points.
\[[return](#Aside20)\]

######## Aside 21

Frutiger could be read at a specified level of accuracy when presented
for a shorter time than Eurostile. \[[return](#Aside21)\]

######## Aside 22

The technique used in Moys (2014a) uses a repertory grid procedure which
elicits [constructs](#construct) from participants, rather than
providing these. It is based on Kelly's personal construct theory of
personality (Kelly, 1955) and has been developed and applied to
different disciplines, such as the study by Bartram (1982) on typeface
semantics summarised earlier in Chapter 5. \[[return](#Aside22)\]

######## Aside 23

I have a problem in distinguishing between perception and cognition as I
don't know where perception stops and cognition begins. I therefore
treat this suggestion as an (over)enthusiastic attempt to explain the
results. \[[return](#Aside23)\]

######## Aside 24

The names which occur on many papers in support of disfluency are Daniel
Oppenheimer, Professor of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University[^13]
and Adam Alter, Associate Professor of Marketing, New York University's
Stern School of Business[^14]. \[[return](#Aside24)\]