## 5 Overview of research

### Introduction

Legibility research up to about the 1980s explored printed material.
Herbert Spencer who had written an overview of legibility research in
1968 commented soon after that legibility research needs to be about
different forms of output and all media (Spencer, 1970, p73). I doubt he
could have envisaged the current ubiquity of mobile phones and tablets,
but he did realise that new issues would arise without the constraints
of the printed page. Although some relatively recent studies have
focused on print legibility (e.g. Lonsdale, 2006, 2007), investigations
of reading from and interacting with screens are probably now the more
common interests for legibility research. []{#Aside8 .anchor}([Aside
8](#aside-8))

In providing an overview of the outcomes of legibility research, I am
starting with type and building up from there. Research using material
presented on screens is discussed together with print, and comparisons
made where relevant. Rather than simply summarise the results, I also
include the context and objectives of the research because these can
affect how we interpret the results and relate them to design practice.
Although you may think that a clear set of guidelines and
recommendations on how to design to optimise legibility may be more
helpful, these would probably oversimplify and mislead. I think a better
approach is to try to understand how and why typographic and graphic
variables affect different aspects of reading to inform design
decisions, rather than prescribe how to design. A set of guidelines
based on research are available covering web design and usability.[^9]

#### Screen versus paper

A starting point for research into reading from screen was comparisons
with paper; Dillon (1992; 2004, Chapter 3) reviews these studies. In a
sense, these were legibility studies as they used measures such as speed
of reading and the results usually indicated that reading from screen
was slower. At the time, they were helpful in informing educators, but
had limited practical application for designers looking for guidance on
optimal legibility, unless they were deciding between using screen or
print. The results have less relevance today as these older studies from
the 1980s and 1990s used cathode ray tube (CRT) technology, now obsolete
and replaced with thin film transistor liquid crystal displays
(TFT-LCD). These have the advantages of higher display resolution and
other improvements in image quality and text presentation capabilities.
Panel 5.1 describes a study looking at [anti-aliasing](#anti-aliasing)
and whether this improves legibility.

Panel 5.1: Description of anti-aliasing technique: sub-pixel rendering

Operating systems now use techniques of anti-aliasing and sub-pixel
rendering which means that text on screen is close to the quality of
printed text. An example of sub-pixel rendering is ClearType, developed
by Microsoft in 2000. This technology renders text on screen by
separately addressing red, green, and blue sub-pixels with the aim of
increasing text legibility.

A relatively small number of studies have tested reader performance and
preference with ClearType. The results are somewhat inconsistent which
might be due to the different tasks, the choice of technology for
comparison, and individual preferences for colour filtering. ClearType
text has been found to increase reading speed when compared with
non-ClearType (Dillon, Kleinman, Bias, Choi, and Turnbull, 2004;
Slattery and Rayner, 2010) but no functional improvements were
identified when compared with perceptually-tuned grayscale, a different
level of ClearType (Sheedy, Tai, Subbaram, Gowrisankaran, and Hayes,
2008). In this study, moderate ClearType rendering was preferred to text
with grayscale or higher-level ClearType contrast, being perceived as
improving clarity and contrast.

Along with backlit LCD displays we have dedicated e-book readers with
electronic paper or electronic ink (eInk) screens deliberately
resembling paper. Given the changes in technology, there are now fewer
differences between material in print and on screen and readers also
have greater familiarity with reading from screens. []{#Aside9
.anchor}([Aside 9](#aside-9))

However, some ergonomic differences remain, particularly with desktop
computers, such as the distance between reader and material (greater
distance for screens), and angle of material to reader (Figure 5.1).
Other differences between print and smaller screens (tablets and phones)
are primarily related to how text is structured and how we interact with
it, and possibly less to do with reading at the level of individual
letters and words.

Figure 5.1: The distance between reading material and our eyes and the
angle of viewing varies depending on the device. This means that the
visual angle of type is relevant as the same type size will subtend a
smaller angle at a larger distance (see Figure 3.2).

There has been a recent revival of studies comparing reading from screen
and print. These have sought to discover whether reading from screen is
still more difficult than reading print. The results suggest that the
legibility of text on screen is no longer a problem, although
positioning the screen to resemble the angle at which paper is normally
read (a display inclination angle of 15°) may be necessary to reduce
eyestrain. Box 5.1 describes more details of the study.

Questions: Do you prefer reading from a screen or paper? Does this
depend on what you are reading? Might your preference change if you used
a non-preferred method for a reasonably long period of time? Do we
simply prefer what we are most used to doing?

Box 5.1: Details of recent study comparing paper and screen reading

A recent study by German psychologists (Köpper, Mayr, and Buchner, 2016)
comparing paper and screen used:

-   an Apple MacBook Pro with a TFT-LCD widescreen display, backlit by
    an LED, on a 15.4 inch screen at a resolution of 1680 x 1050 pixels,
    128 ppi (pixels per inch)

-   an Apple iPad 2

-   a 210 x 297 mm sheet of white high quality paper printed using a 600
    dpi (dots per inch) laser printer

They measured proofreading accuracy and speed of reading and found no
differences between screen and paper. However, screen reading resulted
in reports of a stronger degree of eyestrain and reading print was
preferred. Reducing the screen luminance did not help but using an iPad
which was displayed at the same angle as paper removed the difference in
eyestrain symptoms and increased proofreading speed from screen.

### Type

A perhaps surprising conclusion from various studies is that typefaces
in common use for text (as opposed to display or ornamental typefaces)
do not show differences in performance, typically measured by speed of
reading and comprehension (Figure 5.2). The traditional research studies
are summarised in Tinker (1963, 1965).

Figure 5.2: One of the traditional studies included seven frequently
used typefaces and three radically different ones. Cloister Black was
read the slowest; Garamond was one of the seven which showed no
differences in reading speed (Paterson and Tinker, 1932 summarised in
Tinker, 1963, 46--47).

Comparing on-screen typefaces, even those specifically designed for
screen (e.g. Georgia, Verdana, Trebuchet, Tahoma) we find that they may
not help us read faster, but also do not slow us down. Differences
emerge with rather obscure and unusual typefaces that look radically
different to the others. For example, a difference is found when
comparing Tahoma (sans serif) with an ornate typeface, Corsiva (Figure
5.3).

Figure 5.3: As with print-based studies, differences emerge only when
comparing text typefaces (e.g. Tahoma) with ornate typefaces (e.g.
Corsiva) (Bernard, Mills, Peterson, and Storrer, 2001).

Readers' opinions of relative legibility (subjective judgements) do
discriminate between typefaces but this is not usually linked with
differences in how they are read (Box 5.2). On the whole, typefaces
which have been designed for screen, or are used frequently, are
perceived as easier to read and preferred (Boyarski, Neuwirth, Forizzi,
and Regli, 1998; Bernard, Mills, Peterson, and Storrer, 2001). They tend
to have a larger x-height, wider characters, more open counters and less
variation in stroke width.

Box 5.2: Details of study comparing perceived and actual legibility

A study carried out as part of an undergraduate dissertation at the
University of Reading, UK looked at the link between how readers judge
legibility and how well they identify words (Thompson, 2009). It also
explored whether perceptions of legibility change after doing a
legibility test. In other words, do readers know how they perform in a
test? Are readers able to use their performance to inform their
judgements?

Ten typefaces were used (see Figure 5.4) with five described as
conventional (Caslon, Courier, Georgia, Helvetica, Times) and five as
unconventional (Comic Sans, Corsiva, Curlz MT, Impact, Trajan). These
were matched, as far as possible, on the size of the x-heights, not
point size (see Chapter 4: Comparing typefaces).

Figure 5.4: Ten typefaces used by Thompson (2009) in his study comparing
perceived and actual legibility (subjective and objective measures).

Questions: Do you think the categorisations of conventional and
unconventional are appropriate? What about Comic Sans? What features or
characteristics make a typeface conventional? Which category of typeface
(conventional or unconventional) do you think is more legible?

Two groups of participants were tested: ten designers and ten
non-designers. The study proceeded as follows:

-   Compare pairs of typefaces (see Chapter 4: Paired comparisons) and
    identify the one perceived as more legible

-   Report single words presented on screen for a short time

-   Again compare pairs of typefaces and identify the one perceived as
    more legible

As you probably can predict, the conventional typefaces were judged as
more legible than the unconventional. This was true for designers and
non-designers although the difference was more marked for designers. The
pattern of results was essentially the same before and after the word
identification test; Caslon and Georgia did switch places but their
scores were very similar. (Figure 5.5)

Figure 5.5: Ranked order from most to least legible based on paired
comparisons before word recognition task.

Question: Can you suggest why designers might have a stronger bias
towards perceiving conventional typefaces as more legible than
unconventional ones?

The typefaces that were read most easily also grouped according to
conventional and unconventional, with conventional more legible. There
was one clear exception which was Comic Sans which turns out to be easy
to read (Figure 5.6). Yet readers don't judge it as easy to read (ranked
6 out of 10). Why not?

Figure 5.6: Data from performance test showing the most correct
identifications (Comic Sans) down to the least (Curlz).

Occasionally research finds a difference among typefaces when care has
been taken to make the experiment as sensitive as possible (see Chapter
4: Challenges*)*. For example, an advantage has been demonstrated for
the sans serif Gill Medium over other sans serif typefaces but no
differences between serif and sans serif typefaces (Poulton, 1965). His
method was to limit reading time of passages of text to 90 seconds and
measure how much was comprehended through open-ended questions with
short answers (easier to score). This study used two versions of
Univers: one matching the other typefaces in terms of x-height; the
other matching point size (Figure 5.7).

Figure 5.7: The sans serif typefaces used by Poulton (1965) showing the
two versions of Univers.

#### Serif versus sans serif

One of the more common and somewhat controversial debates concerns the
relative legibility of serif and sans serif typefaces. Comparisons of
serif and sans serif typefaces typically find no differences in speed of
reading or comprehension*.* In a critical review of 72 studies that
compare different typefaces, Lund (1999) found no valid conclusion in
favour of either serif or sans serif typefaces. Box 5.3 describes one
study supposedly showing an advantage for a serif face.

Question: Why might comparisons of serif and sans serif typefaces be a
popular topic for a study?

Box 5.3: Critique of study comparing serif and sans serif type

One study which appears to contradict the lack of any reliable
difference between reading serif and sans serif typefaces is reported in
a booklet and was subsequently incorporated into a book (Wheildon, 1986,
1995). Comprehension was measured for an article with a serif type
(Corona) and compared with a sans serif (Helvetica). The results show an
unbelievable difference in comprehension:

-   67% of readers had good comprehension levels for serif type

-   12% of readers had good comprehension levels for sans serif type

The size of the difference between these two typefaces is astonishing in
comparison with the results of other researchers. Assuming the results
are reported accurately, the method of testing may be responsible for
the extraordinary nature of the findings. The method is described only
briefly, not reaching the standard required for scientific publications,
and it is worth noting that this research was not published in an
academic journal. Some aspects of the brief account of the method reveal
a lack of understanding of experimental procedures. Readers are asked
'leading questions about their attitudes to the articles and layout of
the pages' (Wheildon, 1995, p9). Also worrying is Wheildon's concern
that the results may have been biased or distorted if he had not done
all the work himself.

I include this example because it has been treated seriously by some
writers who have not questioned the reliability or validity of the
findings. Rather than uncritically citing these results as evidence for
differences in legibility, they should be evaluated alongside the
majority of other research which has not found the same huge
differences.

These comparisons of sans and serif typefaces used existing typefaces
which therefore vary in a number of ways other than presence or absence
of serifs (Chapter 4: Comparing typefaces). These differences include
thickness of stems, lengths of ascenders and descenders, character
widths, ratios of thin to thick stroke widths. More recently some
studies have aimed to isolate the effect of serifs from these other
variables; researchers have found it easier to manipulate typefaces and
change individual characteristics with the introduction of digital type.
However, expertise is required in these manipulations as there is an
interrelationship of elements in a well-designed typeface, within and
among letters, which can be disrupted.

This expertise was incorporated into a study carried out by a
mathematician, Robert A. Morris, with vision scientist colleagues, by
involving a type designer, Charles Bigelow. This study has been referred
to above in relation to combining disciplines (Chapter 3) and the
challenge of comparing typefaces (Chapter 4). The researchers compared a
serif and sans serif version of Lucida, designed by Bigelow and Holmes.
The underlying forms are identical with the major variation the presence
or absence of serifs which results in a slight increase in the black
area of the serif version. They used a small (about 4 point) and large
(about 16 point) size and found that serifs slowed down reading at the
small size, but there were no differences at the large size.

The sans and serif versions of Lucida have been tested more recently
looking at words and sentences. []{#Aside10 .anchor}([Aside
10](#aside-10)).

-   With words, the sans serif version was responded to quicker than the
    serif version (Moret-Tatay and Perea, 2011).

-   The second study (Perea, 2013) wished to find out if there is an
    advantage for a serif typeface over a sans serif during ordinary
    reading. Publication norms, such as the American Psychological
    Association (APA), specify that [manuscripts](#manuscripts) should
    be submitted to journals using a serif typeface like Times New
    Roman. This might suggest that they believe the text will be easier
    to read in a serif typeface. The study found that the differences
    are minimal and did not show the same slight advantage for sans
    serif found with individual words. (See Box 5.4 for further details
    of methods of all the Lucida studies)

Box 5.4: Details of studies using Lucida

The study by Morris, Aquilante, Yager, and Bigelow (2002) used sentences
presented on screen using RSVP (see Chapter 4: Threshold and related
measures*)* and displayed these at a distance. Characters with an
x-height of 40 pixels at a 4-metre distance equates to about 4 point
type at a normal reading distance (40 cm). By increasing the size of the
type, characters could be rendered appropriately (i.e. sufficient
pixels). Displaying a 4 point type on screen might have resulted in
problems. By viewing at a distance, the visual angle is reduced and the
characters appear smaller. (See description of visual angles, Panel 3.1,
as a reminder of the relationship between size and distance). The large
(16 point) type was produced with an x-height of 160 pixels at a 4-metre
distance.

Moret-Tatay and Perea (2011) used individual words and a [lexical
decision task](#lexical-decision-task) which involves deciding whether
the item is a word or a non-word. This task requires us to not only
identify letters but process them to the point of matching them with a
word (or not).

Perea (2013) decided it was important to use a setting closer to typical
reading than the lexical decision task and RSVP (used by Morris *et
al.*, 2002). One-line sentences in 14 point Lucida or Lucida Sans were
read on screen and eye movements were monitored.

Reasons proposed for the advantage of serif typefaces for reading
continuous text are that the serifs:

-   contribute to the individuality of letters (yes, possibly)

-   make words and lines hang together (no)

-   guide the eye along the line of text (no)

The first reason is plausible as we know that the individuality of
letters is important; the easier it is to differentiate letters, the
easier it will be to read. However, there are other means of making
letters more discriminable than adding serifs (see Letter features,
below). See Panel 5.2 for explanations as to why the last two reasons
don't fit with what we know about reading.

Panel 5.2: Critique of the role of serifs in reading

There is no evidence that serifs have the functions of keeping letters
in words together or words in lines. These are two quite distinct
functions and neither fit with what we know about reading. It is
possible that this explanation stems, in part, from the mistaken belief
that we use word shape, rather than individual letters, to recognise
words. Letter and word spacing (covered below) may affect the ease with
which we recognise letters and words.

There are reasons why serifs are unlikely to guide the eye along the
line of text. We use our peripheral (parafoveal) vision to guide where
we land our eyes following a saccade. The targets for saccades are
probably determined by the location of word boundaries. The serifs would
be much less effective at guiding the landing points of the saccades
because the detail of serifs is largely missing in our peripheral
vision; our visual acuity decreases with distance from the fovea.

#### Individual letters 

Tinker explored the relative legibility of lower case letters
(summarised in Tinker, 1963). He concluded that some letters are
intrinsically more legible than others because they are more
discriminable, i.e. they have certain distinguishing features.

-   High legibility: d m p q w

-   Medium legibility: j r v x y

-   Low legibility: c e i n l

Tinker came up with this order from most to least legible:\
k d q b p m w f h j y r t x v z c o a u g e i n s l

The reasons given by Tinker for these differences in legibility are:

-   some letter pairs may be confused such as c and e; i and j; i and l

-   narrower letters (e or i) are less legible than wider letters (m and
    w)

-   simpler outlines (w and q) are more legible than more complex
    outlines (a and g)

-   having a distinguishing characteristic aids legibility such that b d
    p q k will be more legible than n and u

Another possible reason for differences in legibility is [letter
frequency](#letter-frequency). The accuracy of identifying a letter
(Larson and Carter, 2016) and the speed of determining whether an item
is a letter or a non-letter (New and Grainger, 2011) has been found to
correlate with the letter's frequency. We might expect that the more
often we encounter a letter, the easier it is to identify. However, not
all studies have found this effect, and this includes Tinker who
reported no relation or a small negative correlation between letter
frequency and legibility with lower case letters (Tinker, 1928).

As we cannot choose to compose a text that avoids letters of low
legibility, or low frequency, these deductions are not particularly
helpful. They may guide type designers as to where attention might be
focused to improve the legibility of their typefaces, or help the design
of logotypes. But as graphic designers choosing a typeface for use in
particular circumstances (e.g. low illumination) or for specific groups
of readers (e.g. visually impaired, beginner readers), we need to know
which features of typefaces, not letters, influence legibility. Tinker
did include some direction on the shape of serifs and which letters they
are applied to; the ratio between thick and thin stroke widths
(modulation); and the size of counters (white space within letters).
However, these suggestions were not supported by experiments and were
also influenced by the printing processes of the time. We should
therefore look to more recent research.

#### Letter features

Psychological research has shown that we detect simple features of
letters, in order to identify the letters. These were previously
described as 'distinctive features' emphasising their role in providing
cues to differentiating the letters. In Chapter 2 I mentioned that
researchers who develop models of reading have tended to assume that the
font will not affect how letters are identified. But more recent
research indicates that if there are more features, we are less
efficient at identifying the letters. More complex forms, e.g. ornate
typefaces, have more features (Panel 5.3). Therefore, what Tinker
deduced, but did not test, appears to be correct although he was
referring to different letters rather than different typefaces. Simpler
outlines are more legible than complex outlines. The example in Figure
5.8 is exaggerated, as we wouldn't consider a script typeface (with a
complex outline) to be suitable for reading continuous text, but a
comparison of these two typefaces illustrates the point.

Figure 5.8: Kunstler Script, 36 point (top) is compared with Arial, 24
point (bottom).

Simpler forms of some letters have been developed for children's reading
based on the view held by many teachers that children will find it
easier to read letters that are similar in shape to those they write.
The modified letters are described as 'infant characters' and the
differences are most apparent in the 'a' and 'g' (see Figure 5.9). A
study by Walker and Reynolds (2003) found no differences between
typefaces with and without infant characters in terms of errors when
children between 5 and 7 years old read aloud. The children were aware
of the different forms, with some able to identify which they read and
which they used in writing. These results suggest that non-infant
characters are not problematic and they do not necessarily help in
discriminating among letters.

Figure 5.9: Two versions of Gill Sans showing the modified shape of the
'a' and 'g' in the bottom row. A child in the study by Walker and
Reynolds (2003) also noticed the difference between the 'y' in the
infant typeface.

Panel 5.3: How perimetric complexity is measured

How do we measure complexity? One way is perimetric complexity which
compares the perimeter (the inside and outside edge) to the overall area
of the letters which is described as the 'ink' (the area covered by
pixels). The precise formula is the inside and outside perimeter (p)
squared, divided by the total ink (a).

p^2^/a

A convoluted or elaborate form will have a larger perimeter compared to
total area and therefore be more complex. Perimetric complexity is not
exactly the same as peoples' subjective ratings of complexity; these
tend to reflect the number of turns in the outline. (Pelli, Burns,
Farell, and Moore-Page, 2006).

This century, a number of psychological studies have aimed to identify
the particular features that are most important in identifying letters.
Unfortunately, they have produced different answers which means that
further research is necessary to clarify our knowledge. The reasons for
different conclusions may be because of variation in the:

-   way letters are divided into components

-   method of testing

-   typeface used in the test

-   case, either upper or lower case, or both

To add to the confusion, the terminology for the different letter parts
doesn't always coincide with the more precise descriptions of type
designers. Also, there isn't always consistency in terminology across
studies. In outlining the results of four of these studies, I will
introduce a consistent terminology. Designers talk of 'strokes' rather
than lines, reflecting a calligraphic origin, and the components can be
described as:

-   stroke terminals or endings (rather than terminations) which will
    differ in a serif typeface; this means that the features underlying
    letter recognition may depend on the typeface

-   stroke junctions (sometimes called intersections or vertices)

-   mid segments which can include vertical, horizontal, diagonal or
    curved strokes

One of the original studies to explore the role of various components of
letters used the typeface Courier (Petit and Grainger, 2002). They found
that mid segments of letters play a critical role in letter
identification (see Figure 5.10).

Figure 5.10: Complete letters in Courier upper case (top); letters with
only the stroke junctions (middle); letters with only the mid segments
(bottom).

Some years later, two studies using the typeface Arial report that
stroke terminals (in particular) and horizontal lines (a form of mid
segment) are important cues to letter identity for both upper and lower
case letters; stroke junctions are quite important for uppercase; and
slants tilted right (another type of mid segment) are more useful for
identifying lowercase than uppercase (Fiset, Blais, Éthier-Majcher,
Arguin, Bub, and Gosselin, 2008; Fiset, Blais, Arguin, Tadros,
Éthier-Majcher, Bub, and Gosselin, 2009). Figure 5.11 shows these parts
of letters.

Figure 5.11: The parts or features of letters that have been found to be
important for recognising the letters and distinguishing them from
others. The top two rows show the stroke terminals or endings that are
important in letter identification in upper and lowercase. The two
middle rows show the horizontal strokes, again used in identifying upper
and lower case letters. The last two rows show the stroke junctions that
are most relevant in identifying upper case letters, and the diagonal
strokes tilted right, used as cues in lower case.

Around the same time, Lanthier, Risko, Stolzh, and Besner (2009) found
that taking out the stroke junctions from Arial Narrow upper case
letters makes letter and word identification more difficult compared to
taking out the mid segments (see Figure 5.12). This suggests that stroke
junctions are important in letter identification.

Figure 5.12: Complete letters in Arial Narrow upper case (top); letters
without the mid segments (middle); letters without the stroke junctions
(bottom).

The fourth study, again exploring which components of letters are more
important in words, uses the typeface Minion (Rosa, Perea, and Enneson,
2016). Their results show that the mid-segments are the most important
for identification, followed by stroke junctions; terminals do not
appear to be critical. Figure 5.13 illustrates the removal of each of
the three components as this manipulation was used to determine the
contribution of each. As this study used a serif typeface (in contrast
to a sans serif, Arial), removing terminals may have less impact.

Figure 5.13: Four versions of the word perpetua starting with the whole
word and showing the three types of deletions: terminals deleted,
junctions deleted, mid-segments deleted (Rosa, Perea, and Enneson,
2016.)

Box 5.5 provides more detail on how these four studies divided letters
into components and the different methods of testing.

Box 5.5: Methods used to identify letter features

One way in which the procedures used in the studies vary is whether
components of the letters are removed or certain components selected for
inclusion. It may seem as though the outcome would be the same but this
is not the case as there are other parts to the letter (see Figure
5.14). The fourth study I reported (Rosa, Perea, and Enneson, 2016)
includes both procedures: they started by including components and did
not find any differences among mid segments, stroke junctions and
terminals. When they changed to deleting each of the components, they
did find differences (see Figure 5.13).

Figure 5.14: Mid segments and junctions are included in the letters of
the word (left); terminals are deleted (right). Based on Figures 2 and 3
of Rosa, Perea and Enneson (2016).

The methods used to measure letter or word identification include:

-   [priming](#priming) with alphabetic decision or letter
    identification: a full letter or part of a letter (Figure 5.10) is
    shown for a very short time (30 or 50msecs) and then the same
    complete letter is shown and the participant says whether it is a
    letter or not (alphabetic decision) or says which letter it is
    (letter identification)

-   delayed segment with lexical decision: a part of the word is
    displayed very briefly followed by the whole word and the
    participant says if it is a word or not a word

-   straightforward letter and word identification, i.e. name the letter
    or word

-   a classification image technique which essentially varies the amount
    of the letter displayed over time and the participant identifies the
    letter

Comparing the results from the four groups of researchers indicates that
we don't yet have a clear picture of how we identify a letter. Two
studies highlight mid segments as important, one stroke junctions and
another terminals. As yet, I am not aware of any study which compares
different typefaces (upper and lower case) using one of these methods to
see if the components or features we use to differentiate letters depend
on the typeface characteristics. []{#Aside11 .anchor}([Aside
11](#aside-11))

A more typographical perspective is to look at serifs which can function
as terminals and may contribute to differentiating some letters. But why
do no clear differences emerge when serif and sans serif typefaces are
compared? A possible contributory factor is that serifs can improve the
discriminability of some letters (i.e. make them less similar to other
letters) but serifs may also make other letters less discriminable, and
therefore liable to misrecognition. Therefore at some stroke endings
serifs may help, but not at all endings. Box 5.6 describes some studies
which address this issue focusing on specific letters.

Box 5.6: Details of studies looking at the contribution of serifs

Some time ago, Harris (1973) compared the legibility of individual
letters in two sans serif typefaces (Univers 689 and Gill Sans Medium)
and one serif typeface (Baskerville 169). The letters were shown off
centre in a tachistoscope, for brief viewing. His results suggested that
serifs can close up open counters, impairing recognition, but in other
letters the serif enhances gaps. As he used existing typefaces, the
results may be attributed to aspects of the typeface other than serifs
(e.g. x-height, letter contrast, weight).

A study by Beier and Dyson (2014) followed up on this looking at the
same individual lower case letters (j, i, l, b, h, n, u, a). The letters
were set in the typeface Ovink, a sans serif typeface designed for
distance viewing, and a new slab serif version which differed only in
relation to the added serifs. The typefaces are designed by Sofie Beier
(see Figure 5.15).

Figure 5.15: The two versions of Ovink differing only in relation to the
serifs.

In this case, the role that serifs play when letters are viewed at a
distance was explored. We found that serifs at vertical extremes (l, b,
h, n, u) facilitate letter recognition but in letters i and j, serifs do
not help. The serif is not at the vertical extreme because of the dot.
In these letters, the serifs may remove the narrow character of these
two letters resulting in lower legibility. See Figure 5.16.

Figure 5.16: Recommendations from Beier and Dyson (2014): remove serifs
when not at extremes (i); h can be confused with b so recommended that
serifs removed from the counter of h.

These outcomes support the general conclusion that serifs can be both
helpful and unhelpful in letter recognition. This tends to make choosing
a typeface rather complicated but helps to explain why we don't find
differences in performance when comparing serif and sans serif.

Unfortunately, the conclusions are even less straightforward as
different results can be obtained when looking at individual letters
viewed in parafoveal vision (off centre), rather than at a distance.
This has important implications for designers in choosing typefaces for
specific contexts.

Another approach to determining which features influence legibility has
focused on individual letter confusions such as those proposed by Tinker
(i.e. 'c' and 'e'). The objectives were to provide recommendations for
specific design elements for onscreen reading and situations where codes
or single characters need to be quickly and accurately identified, such
as air traffic control displays (Fox, Chaparro, and Merkle, 2007). Box
5.7 describes what this study found.

Box 5.7: Outcomes of study looking at letter 'e'

We do have some insight into the particular difficulties with the letter
'e', which can be mistaken for a 'c' or 'o'. Comparing 20 typefaces, an
'e' in Verdana was always correctly identified whereas an 'e' in
Garamond was only correct 10% of the time. Using a statistical
procedure, the researchers determined that the problem with Garamond is
the higher bar compared to overall height. Surprisingly, the overall
size was not important. Although this result seems plausible, we might
instead describe the difference as a smaller counter (see Figure 5.17).

Figure 5.17: Garamond (left) has a higher bar, in relation to overall
height, than Verdana (right). This results in Garamond having a smaller
counter.

Letter features have been researched from psychological and design
perspectives, the former aiming to formulate more general theories of
letter processing and the latter focusing on specific details. They
therefore complement each other. A useful way forward might be to
establish whether the general theories apply to all typefaces by
comparing typefaces with very different characteristics.

#### Upper versus lower halves of letters and words

An effect which can be very easily demonstrated is the relative ease of
reading text when only the top halves of letters are available compared
with the bottom halves (Figure 5.18). This is obviously not a way in
which we would set text, but it may tell us something about how we read,
for example through eye movements. This knowledge may help us, perhaps
indirectly, in making design decisions.

Huey (1908/1968) observed the advantage to perception of the upper half
claiming that

...the upper half of a word or letter is obviously more important for
perception than is the lower half.\
Huey (1968, p98)

Figure 5.18: It is easier to read the text when the top halves of
letters are visible than when we only see the bottom halves.

This was explained in an early printers' handbook *Typographical
printing-surfaces: the technology and mechanism of their production* by
Legros and Grant (1916) as more frequent letters projecting above the
middle line. Letter frequency counts can vary depending on how they have
been counted, what content is used, and the language. However, despite
differences the consensus is that the first letter with a descender ('p'
or 'g' in English and probably 'p' in Spanish) is number 16 in terms of
frequency; there are 4 or 5 letters with ascenders that are more
frequent than 'p'. Logically, this tells us that there will be more
letter parts above the midline than below which can disambiguate the
letter. A comparison of the level of ambiguity in the lower and upper
part of letters across some European languages (Tejero, Perea, and
Jiménez, 2014) shows similarities:

-   English: 68% of letters are ambiguous in lower part; 51% ambiguous
    in upper part

-   Spanish: 68% of letters ambiguous in lower part; 50% ambiguous in
    upper part

-   French: 68% of letters ambiguous in lower part; 50% ambiguous in
    upper part []{#Aside12 .anchor}([Aside 12](#aside-12))

By examining eye movements, we know that the eye fixates for longer when
reading the lower half compared to the upper half, indicating that
removing the upper half produces a greater cost to reading (Perea,
2012). The research described above which identified the features of
letters we use to distinguish one letter from another did not find a
bias towards features in the upper parts of letters. The bias we see in
the demonstration (Figure 5.18) appears to be restricted to letters in
the context of words. This is because words do not have equal numbers of
each letter but have more letters that are ambiguous in their lower part
(in the Latin alphabet). This is evidenced by a clever experiment which
controlled the number of ambiguous letters in the top and bottom half of
words and removed the effect (Tejero, Perea, and Jiménez, 2014).

#### Upper versus lower case

Unlike comparisons of different typefaces, a fairly consistent result is
that all upper case (capitals) slows down reading compared with lower
case or sentence case (where the beginnings of sentences are
capitalised). In the past, this was attributed to the loss of word shape
(ascenders and descenders) in upper case, but as we read by identifying
individual letters, this cannot be the explanation. We are more familiar
with reading lower case in continuous text which can account for this
advantage. []{#Aside13 .anchor}([Aside 13](#aside-13)) This explanation
is proposed by a very recent study which found that when reading
sentences, words in upper case were more likely to be re-fixated (looked
at again) than words in lowercase (Perea, Rosa, and Marcet, 2017). The
researchers suggest that we do an initial familiarity check before we
move our eyes to the next location and this check is more likely to be a
match with stored words if we are reading more familiar visual forms.

However, at the same point size, upper case is larger than lower case.
Should the x-height of lower case be equal to the cap height when we
make comparisons in experiments?

-   If lower case (bold) letters approximately match the x-heights of
    upper case (Figure 5.19), headlines are located faster in lower case
    (Poulton, 1967).

-   If we don't adjust but compare Arial in the same point size for caps
    and lower case (Figure 5.20), upper case appears to be more legible
    (Arditi and Cho, 2007). This is logical as the upper case letters
    are larger. For readers with normal vision, reading is quicker for
    upper case when at acuity limits, but this advantage goes when using
    a larger size that is typical of regular reading conditions.

Figure 5.19 Comparison of text in Times New Roman 22.5 point bold and
Times New Roman 14 point all capitals. The x-height of the upper
examples matches the cap height of the lower example by adjusting the
nominal point size. With this adjustment, headlines were found faster in
bold lower case (Poulton, 1967).

Figure 5.20: Lower and upper case both in 12 point Arial.

All of this seems to point to the physical size of letters being
important, as well as familiarity, i.e. what we are used to reading.

Question: Are you surprised by this?

#### Type size

If we remain at the level of letters, explaining legibility would seem
to be very straightforward:

The size and shape of printed symbols determine the legibility of text.\
Legge and Bigelow (2011, p1)

Shapes have been covered above in some detail and differences between
upper and lower case led to the conclusion that size may be more
relevant than shape.

One approach to finding out the most appropriate type size for reading
continuous text is to determine limits. The smallest character size for
which reading is possible at maximum speed is called 'critical print
size'. At sizes smaller than this, reading speed gets much slower. The
critical print size depends on individuals, typefaces, and how you
measure it. There is also the difficulty discussed above that typefaces
of the same point size have different x-heights. Because the smallest or
optimal point size for legibility will depend on the typeface, some
research will be valid only for the particular typefaces used in the
studies.

A way to resolve this issue may have emerged from the collaboration
(mentioned previously) between the vision scientist and type designer
(Legge and Bigelow, 2011). They take various past studies and translate
the type sizes into measurements of the visual angles of the x-heights.
To make this accessible to designers, they describe what this would mean
in relation to a common typeface. They report that studies indicate that
the critical print size is an x-height of 0.2 degrees which is
equivalent to 9 point Times New Roman at a distance of 40cm. This
happens to be consistent with Tinker finding that 9 point Granjon was
read as fast as larger sizes (Tinker, 1963, p71). This convergence of a
minimum size for print is encouraging as different methods were used to
come to the same conclusion making the result more reliable. However, a
distinction should be made between the critical print size (minimum) and
the size that optimises reading performance. Box 5.8 gives more details
of the collaborative study.

Box 5.8: Details of study by vision scientist and type designer

This collaboration went further in bringing together typography and
psychology by considering whether the size of print we use today (and
historically) corresponds to the most appropriate size for fluent
reading. In other words, have we got it right in the past and present
without the specific scientific knowledge that we now have?

The research involves a survey of documents (published books,
newspapers, and typefounders' specimens) looking at the size of print
and comparing this to what we know about the
[psychophysics](#psychophysics) of reading. They found that these sizes
fall within the range over which text can be read at maximum speed. They
conclude by proposing that the properties of human visual processing
play a dominant role in constraining the distribution of print sizes in
common use. Their conclusion supports an [ecological
hypothesis](#ecological-hypothesis) that decisions made by type
designers and typographers on type sizes have been determined by
properties of our vision.

I suspect that craft experience and practical design skills and training
encourage an awareness of the need to attend to perceptions of what we
design, not just the objects themselves. A key issue in the study of
perception (within psychology) is the potential for the lack of a
one-to-one relationship between a physical entity and its perception.
This can be best demonstrated with Rubin's vase (Figure 5.21). Do you
see a vase or faces?

Figure 5.21: Rubin's vase named after the Danish psychologist Edgar
Rubin. This is one example of an ambiguous form that has two shape
interpretations (perceptions) with only one physical entity and one
retinal image. We can only see one perception at a time, but you should
be able to switch between the two.

On screen, a slightly larger size of 10 point seems to be required for
'threshold legibility', i.e. the smallest size that we can recognise
letters and words. The importance of x-height in relation to body size
was also found to be a factor in increasing legibility (Sheedy,
Subbaram, Zimmerman and Hayes, 2005). For a given body size, Verdana was
the most legible and Times New Roman the least legible, with Arial and
Georgia intermediate in legibility (see Figure 5.22).

Figure 5.22: Relationship between x-height and body size (based on
figures in Legge and Bigelow, 2011) which correspond to threshold
legibility.

When speed of reading is measured, 12 point is read faster than 10
point, but the difference is relatively small. In this study by Bernard,
Lida, Riley, Hackler, and Janzen (2002), the researchers found a
trade-off between speed and accuracy: the slightly faster reading of 12
point resulted in missing some of the deliberate errors (substituted
words) in the text. Some suggestion that there may be no advantage in
going above 10 point on screen when using Helvetica and Georgia comes
from an eye tracking study (Beymer, Russell, and Orton, 2008). But we
must remember that the x-height of the typeface is likely to be the
determining factor.

All of the above research relates to adults. Children's reading books
typically use larger type sizes and generous line spacing and these both
reduce as reading age increases. The key is to ensure that differences
among letters are easy to discriminate at early ages so that the child
can focus on the other aspects of reading (deriving sound and meaning)
rather than perceptual processing, i.e. identifying the letters.

Tinker (1965) proposed that by about 10 years old children respond to
typographical arrangements in the same way as adults, therefore at that
age between 10 and 12 point type would be suitable. Sizes recommended
for younger children are:

-   between 14 to 18 point for 5--7 year olds

-   between 14 and 16 point for 7--9 year olds

-   about 12 point for 9--10 year olds

Question: Based on what you now know about how we read, can you suggest
why it may not be a good idea to continue using larger sizes beyond
about 10 years old?

Research seems to support the advantage of larger print for younger
children and some researchers argue that type sizes in children's
reading schemes could be larger than are currently employed (Hughes and
Wilkins, 2000).

#### Type variants (bold and italic)

Traditional research indicates that text set all in italics slows down
reading; bold appears not to affect speed of reading continuous text and
can be perceived at a greater distance (summarised in Tinker, 1963,
1965). Typical practice and recommendations from well-regarded
typographic books such as *The elements of typographic style*
(Bringhurst, 1992) is to use bold for setting titles, emphasising
keywords etc., and to use italic as a means of differentiating words or
sentences within longer paragraphs. These differentiations can be
regarded as '[typographic cueing](#typographic-cueing)' which can work
as an isolation effect, setting apart some information and making it
more likely to be noticed by readers.

Looking at how quickly we can recognise a word (by saying whether it is
a word or not a word -- a non-word), bold words are responded to faster
than roman (using Bookman and Arial typefaces). This is particularly the
case if the word is uncommon (referred to as low frequency) []{#Aside14
.anchor}(Macaya and Perea, 2014). ([Aside 14](#aside-14))

It may seem that it is a good idea to use a bold font for setting whole
texts but some further evidence suggests that a distinction can be made
between a font's legibility and the [perceptual
salience](#perceptual-salience) of individual words (Dyson and Beier,
2016). This study explored switching between roman and different
variants to see which stylistic features (weight, width, contrast, and
italic) disrupt word recognition. We found that single bold words are
perceptually salient (i.e. stand out), but are not particularly legible
as a font. Switching from roman to italic, however, does not slow down
word recognition and suggests that words set in italic will therefore
not function as well as bold for emphasis. Bold seems to be more
appropriate than italic for setting headings or other access devices
through making words stand out.

#### Typeface semantics

In Chapter 1 the idea of a typeface having a semantic role, as well as a
functional role, was introduced. Typefaces can be suited to particular
purposes not only because they are easy to read, but also because they
convey a meaning though their visual form, sometimes described as
personality. This is particularly relevant to marketing where brand
names in appropriate typefaces (i.e. consistent with the product) are
chosen more often than inappropriate ones (e.g. Doyle and Bottomley,
2004, 2006).

These two roles appear to be quite separate. A specific typeface might
be more or less appropriate for a particular context (e.g. shop sign,
wedding invitation, novel, textbook, annual report) but why would the
legibility of this typeface be affected by its personality? This
separation between legibility and aesthetics may not exist according to
a captivating study. This study shows that we respond to words more
slowly if the perceptual qualities of the font are inconsistent with the
meaning of the word, e.g. the word 'heavy' in a 'light' font (Lewis and
Walker, 1989). []{#Aside15 .anchor}([Aside 15](#aside-15)). Figure 5.23
illustrates words where the font is consistent or inconsistent with the
meaning of the word. The origins of this effect are described in Box
5.9.

Figure 5.23 Two of the words used by Lewis and Walker (1989) set in
Cooper Black (heavy) and Palatino Italic (light).

A more recent study confirms that using a font that is inconsistent with
the word's meaning (Figure 5.24) slows down decisions regarding the
emotion conveyed (Hazlett, Larson, Shaikh, and Chaparro, 2013).
Therefore, legibility can be influenced by the meaning conveyed by the
typeface, although there does need to be quite a big difference between
the personalities of the typefaces for this to emerge.

Figure 5.24: Four of the words used by Hazlett, Larson, Shaikh, and
Chaparro (2013) set in Corsiva and Times New Roman.

Box 5.9: Description and demonstration of the Stroop effect

Slowing responses when the font is inconsistent with the word's meaning
is related to a well-known interference effect: the Stroop effect
(Stroop, 1935/1992). The participant is asked to name the colour and is
slower to respond if the word is inconsistent with the colour of the
ink. Have a go at the demonstration in Figure 5.25.

Figure 5.25: Demonstration of the Stroop effect. Name the colour (not
the word).

The tasks used in the two studies illustrated in Figures 5.22 and 5.23
are a reverse of the Stroop effect as participants are asked to respond
to the word's meaning (not the font).

Early studies described the connotations of typefaces as atmosphere
value (Ovink, 1938) and congeniality (Zachrisson, 1970). The
experimental approaches to determining the meaning have usually used
semantic differential scales (see description of Rating in Panel 4.5).
The dimensions that have emerged are:

-   Evaluative measuring the value or worth of items (e.g. good versus
    bad; beautiful versus ugly)

-   Potency measuring the strength (e.g. strong versus weak)

-   Activity measuring action (e.g. active versus passive; fast versus
    slow)

-   Mood measuring happiness (e.g. happy versus sad; relaxed versus
    tense)

The first three dimensions apply to many different types of things, e.g.
political parties or works of art, but mood has been found to be
particularly relevant to typefaces.

As typeface preferences and use change over time, it may be more helpful
to look at results from studies in terms of more general patterns rather
than the personalities of specific typefaces. Shaikh and Chaparro (2016)
report an online survey of 40 on-screen typefaces with trends showing:

-   Display typefaces that are bold, dark, block-like are viewed as
    stronger, less valuable, and more active (Broadway, Agency,
    Playbill)

-   Script typefaces are seen as less strong, more valuable, and less
    active (Vivaldi, French Script, Monotype Corsiva)

But we should note that there are also individual typefaces within a
category that deviate from these trends. Figure 5.26 illustrates the
typefaces.

Figure 5.26: Display typefaces viewed as stronger, less valuable, and
more active. Script typefaces viewed as less strong, more valuable, and
less active (Shaikh and Chaparro, 2016).

As we normally focus on reading, rather than examining the typeface, we
may not be conscious of typeface connotations. But if asked to judge the
appropriateness of a typeface for a particular type of text (e.g.
professional or friendly), readers are aware of consistencies or
inconsistencies (Brumberger, 2003).

We might expect typographers and graphic designers to be rather more
focused on the personality of typefaces. A couple of studies have found
some differences as to how the semantic qualities of typefaces are
perceived based on the level of experience of design, but non-designers
are able to perceive typeface connotations (Tannenbaum, 1964). There is
quite a lot of agreement between designers and non-designers but there
can also be pronounced differences on specific typefaces (Bartram,
1982). For example, designers rate Futura as positive on the Evaluative
and Mood dimensions (e.g. beautiful, pleasant, good, happy, relaxed)
whereas non-designers rate Futura as negative on these same dimensions
(e.g. ugly, unpleasant, bad, sad, tense). Some caution should therefore
be taken in assuming that your own perceptions will be a perfect match
with all readers' perceptions.

Question: How would you go about checking that your choice of
typeface(s) for a project is perceived as appropriate by the readers?

Rather than determining the meaning of a typeface directly, a few
studies have looked at how the content of a text may be influenced by
the typeface. Satirical articles on government issues and education
policy set in Times New Roman were perceived as more satirical (angry
and funny) than the same texts in Arial (Juni and Gross, 2008). However,
this was not a very strong effect and an earlier study failed to show
that the typeface can influence how the text content was perceived
(Brumberger, 2003).

In the context of a job application, consideration should be given to
the choice of typeface. Three identical resumés (CVs) set in three
different typefaces (see Figure 5.27) can affect how an applicant is
perceived (Shaikh and Fox, 2008).

Figure 5.27: The three typefaces used for CVs (Shaikh and Fox, 2008)

Question: Would you use any of these typefaces for your CV? If not, why
not?\
Which of these typefaces would lead you to judge an applicant as
knowledgeable, mature, experienced, professional, believable, and
trustworthy? ([]{#Aside16 .anchor}[Aside 16](\l))

Despite the relevance of typeface connotations to choosing a typeface
for a specific purpose, legibility is more important as a criterion of
appropriateness than consistency for text-heavy document types (Shaikh
and Chaparro, 2016). Readers are aware of the value of ease of reading.

### Letter spacing

In Chapter 2 I introduced 'crowding' which refers to the effect of
surrounding letters in words on the ease of identifying letters. It is
easier to identify single letters if they are not in a word because the
adjacent letters can jumble the appearance of letters. This suggests
that increasing the space between letters would improve word
identification, due to making it easier to identify the individual
letters and accurately locate their position in relation to one another
(e.g. to avoid confusing casual and causal). But if too much space is
used, the letters may not be perceived as a group, i.e. a word. Another
possible disadvantage of increasing letter spacing is that upcoming
words, those we are about to read that are in our parafoveal vision,
will be even further away from our fixation and therefore our acuity
will be reduced.

A font has character widths (including space) built into it and most
text processing software will have some way of adjusting the letter
spacing from the default (0) value. Research exploring deviations from
the defaults has produced the consistent finding that tightening
(decreasing) letter spacing makes reading more difficult. However,
increasing spacing has resulted in contradictory results: either no
benefits or some benefit. This divergence can be explained by
differences in readers, typefaces, method of testing, and amount of
spacing.

Studies which use Courier, a monospaced typeface, found that tighter
than standard spacing reduced reading speed but increasing beyond the
standard did not increase reading speed (Chung, 2002; Yu, Cheung, Legge,
and Chung, 2007). There was no evidence that the effect of crowding was
reduced by increasing beyond the standard spacing. Using Courier is an
odd choice from a designer's perspective but it is easier to specify and
manipulate space with each letter occupying the same fixed width.
However, this property may be the reason why there is no advantage to
increasing letter spacing beyond standard. Monospacing (fixed width)
results in looser spacing, particularly for narrower letters, and
therefore might not need additional spacing, particularly as this means
that words will extend further into our peripheral vision (Figure 5.28).
The adjustments to letter spacing are also rather large compared with
later studies.

Figure 5.28: The monospaced typeface Courier used by Chung (2002). The
standard spacing appears quite loose.

More recent studies have included adult skilled readers, young readers
(7--8 and 9--10 year olds) and young readers with [developmental
dyslexia](#developmental-dyslexia). Words set in 14 point Times New
Roman with additional spacing (see Figure 5.29) are identified faster
than the default spacing. This is true for all three sets of readers.
However, when a reading task is used (not just single words) the
advantage for wider spacing is only found with dyslexic readers. The
reason why these different groups of readers were compared is because
crowding tends to be greater for younger readers compared to adults and
greater for dyslexics than normal readers (Perea, Moret-Tatay, and
Gómez, 2011; Perea, Panadero, Moret-Tatay, and Gómez, 2012).

Figure 5.29 Default spacing (top) and wider spacing (bottom), described
as increasing the value in Microsoft Word to 1.2 (Perea et al., 2011,
2012).

This relationship between increased crowding and spacing has been
further explored by measuring the extent of crowding in individuals and
looking at the corresponding effect of increasing letter, word, and line
spacing (Joo, White, Strodtman, and Yeatman, 2018). Normal spacing
consisted of words set in 11 point Calibri and spacing was increased by
using 11 point Fluent Calibri (see Figure 5.30). A sub-group of adults
with dyslexia who showed greater effects of crowding read faster with
the additional spacing. This study did not determine whether letter,
word, or line spacing is responsible for improving reading performance.

Figure 5.30 Examples of word lists used by (Joo et al., 2018) with
normal spacing in Calibri (top) and increased spacing in Fluent Calibri
(bottom).

When 5--7 year old children were tested in a more natural reading
environment, changes in letter spacing from tight to very wide had no
effect on reading rate or errors (Reynolds and Walker, 2004). The
children were asked to read aloud from a text set in 19 point Century
Educational typeface which is used by publishers of early readers
children's books.

With adult readers and more subtle changes in letter spacing (see Figure
5.31), responses get faster as spacing increases. Reading sentences, we
fixate for a shorter time if there is more spacing (Perea and Gómez,
2012a, 2012b). However, when adults read in a more natural context
(reading stories for comprehension), there is no difference in overall
reading time between default spacing and expanded spacing (1.2), as in
Figure 5.29 (Perea, Giner, Marcet, and Gomez, 2016). Although fixations
are shorter with the extra space between letters, slightly more
fixations are made which cancels out the advantage. The saccade length
is similar in the default and expanded spacings. As we are used to
reading the default setting, and initiating saccades of a specific
length, the question remains as to whether we might adjust the number of
fixations if we read the expanded text for longer.

Figure 5.31: Interletter spacing of -0.5 (condensed), 0 (default), +0.5,
+1.0, +1.5 (expanded) used by Perea and Gómez (2012a).

Research has confirmed that relatively small adjustments to letter
spacing will affect single word recognition in different ways depending
on whether the typeface is proportional or fixed width (Slattery, Yates,
and Angele, 2016). When letter spacing is increased:

-   Words in proportional width typefaces (Calibri, Cambria, Georgia,
    and Verdana) are responded to faster.

-   Words in fixed width typefaces (Consolas and Courier New) are
    responded to slower. This confirms the earlier studies described
    above which also used Courier.

This study found no differences between serif and sans serif typefaces.
This may be because the default spacings are adjusted appropriately (see
Figure 5.32).

Figure 5.32: Comparison of proportional and fixed width typefaces with
three letter spacings: tighter than default, default, and looser than
default. This range of letter spacing is similar to that used by
Slattery, Yates and Angele (2016). The typefaces are (top to bottom)
Calibri, Cambria, Georgia, Verdana, Consolas and Courier New.

In summary, there is some evidence that slightly looser letter spacing
helps dyslexic readers and possibly other readers, but this will depend
on the typeface. E-books might therefore benefit from including control
over letter spacing, particularly for dyslexic readers. Adults spend
less time on individual fixations with looser spacing but more fixations
are made. It therefore looks as though the defaults determined by type
designers are appropriate even though they are not based on empirical
research.

### Word spacing 

In the studies above where sentences were read, word spacing increased
when letter spacing increased. Microsoft Word also automatically adjusts
spaces between words when the user changes letter spacing (see, for
example, Figure 5.31).

Word spaces allow us to segment text into words and help us target where
to land our eyes, based on parafoveal vision. The space before the first
letter of a word and space after the last letter also reduce crowding
effects. All of these factors argue for having quite large word spaces.
But there is a disadvantage as increasing word spaces pushes words
further into our peripheral vision where our acuity drops off sharply.
If letter spacing is reduced but word spacing increased, upcoming words
are not pushed further into peripheral vision (see Figure 5.33). One
study which used these spacings with Georgia and Consolas (a fixed width
sans serif) found a benefit from reducing letter spacing (a little) and
increasing word spacing. However, this was mainly with Georgia, rather
than Consolas, which can be explained by the default spacings (see
Figure 5.32). Georgia has tighter word spacing and so can benefit more
from an increase than Consolas (Slattery and Rayner, 2013).

Figure 5.33: The top sentence in each pair has the default letter and
word spacing. The bottom sentence in each pair has reduced letter
spacing and increased word spacing. The top pair uses the typeface
Georgia and the bottom pair is in Consolas.

This relationship between word and letter spacing was explored further
by Slattery, Yates, and Angele (2016) using Calibri and Consolas to
compare proportional and fixed width typefaces. They confirm the
importance of considering letter and word spacing together and propose
that spaces between words should be at least 3.5 times the spaces
between letters for efficient reading. As with letter spacing, fixed
width Consolas is read slower if word spacing is larger than default,
unless letter spacing is reduced. Calibri is read slower if word spacing
is reduced. Although this study involved reading sentences, the
researchers point out that only single lines of text were used and more
research is required using multiple lines.

In summary, when making adjustments to word spacing:

-   defaults built into different fonts and page layout software need to
    be taken into account

-   the relationship between letter and word spacing is important

-   characteristics of readers may be particularly relevant as younger
    readers and dyslexics are more susceptible to crowding effects

### *Alignment*

Paragraphs of text are typically aligned on the left with the right
margin either aligned to produce justified text or with a ragged right
margin to produce unjustified text. Most studies have shown no
differences in reading speed although fully justified text may be
problematic for poor readers when set in short lines, i.e. 7 words per
line, about 42 characters (see Figure 5.34) or even slightly longer,
about 52 characters (Gregory and Poulton, 1970; Zachrisson, 1965). One
study has looked at alignment in web pages but using a search for a link
in a screen of text, rather than reading the text. Performance was
better with left-aligned then justified text although participants
preferred justified (Ling and van Schaik, 2007).

Figure 5.34: Short lines set in justified (top) and unjustified (bottom)
setting.

The main reason proposed for the reduced legibility of justified text is
the uneven spacing, often described as 'rivers' of white. These larger
word spaces are more likely to occur with:

-   short lines

-   lots of long words

-   wider characters

-   no hyphenation

-   less sophisticated control over word (and letter) spacing

The assumption is that eye movements will be adversely affected by this
unevenness which might be due to the lack of rhythm. Another possible
explanation is that larger word spaces push forthcoming words further
into peripheral vision, reducing their acuity. These factors may be more
important for poorer readers who have a smaller [perceptual
span](#perceptual-span) (and who therefore make use of fewer letters to
the right). These proposed explanations have not been tested, as far as
I know. It is possible that the issue is not differences in legibility
but aesthetic considerations. []{#Aside17 .anchor}([Aside
17](#aside-17)).

### Line length

Line length, sometimes described as line width, can be measured by:

-   physical length of the line (e.g. 15 centimetres), sometimes
    converted to visual angle by taking into account the viewing
    distance

-   number of characters per line (cpl) which can be varied by\
    1) changing type size, keeping physical length constant, or\
    2) keeping type size constant which varies physical length

Figure 5.35 shows the various ways of changing line lengths.

Figure 5.35: Examples showing the relationship between physical line
length, number of characters per line, and type size. Top and middle:
same physical length but smaller type size in middle increases number of
characters per line.\
Top and bottom: same number of characters per line but physical length
varies because of type size.

Research into the relative legibility of different line lengths in print
has led to recommendations that line lengths should not exceed about 70
cpl (Spencer, 1968). Various studies summarised in Tinker (1963) have
been interpreted as supporting an optimal line length of 52 cpl (Rayner
and Pollatsek, 1989, p118). The explanation given for the legibility of
this moderate line length is that it is the outcome of a trade-off
between two opposing factors. If line lengths are too long, the return
sweeps to the beginning of the next line can be inaccurate. If the lines
are too short, readers cannot make maximum use of their peripheral
vision. However, [recent
studies](https://designregression.com/article/line-length-revisited-following-the-research)
have questioned whether inaccurate return sweeps are necessarily
problematic.

Studies looking at line length on screen began in the 1980s but were
constrained as to how they could change line length. They did this by
changing the character density which meant characters of the same height
but different widths, looking something like Figure 5.36.

Figure 5.36: A simulation of different character densities used in the
1980s to change type size and therefore number of characters per line.

An early study showed that smaller characters, with more characters per
line (bottom of Figure 5.36) are read faster and more efficiently with
fewer fixations overall (Kolers, Duchnicky, and Ferguson, 1981). The
line lengths compared were 35 and 70 cpl. Around 20 years later, using
updated screen technology, line length was varied by changing the number
of characters of the same size (Figure 5.37). The study found that
reading rate tended to get faster as lines got longer, surprisingly even
up to 100 cpl (Dyson, 2004, 2005). Similar advantages for longer lines
on screen were found when searching for words, rather than continuous
reading (Youngman and Scharff, 1998; Ling and van Schaik, 2006).

Figure 5.37: Three line lengths used by Dyson in various studies which
change the number of characters, keeping type size (and line spacing)
constant. The top is 25 cpl, the middle 55 cpl, and the bottom 100 cpl.

However, a consistent finding is that long line lengths on screen are
least preferred or judged as least easy to read. Moderate line lengths
(around 50--70 cpl) are preferred which fits with preferences for line
lengths in print. This makes sense as readers may make similar
judgements regardless of whether they are reading print or from screen.
Readers may also be judging what they frequently encounter in printed
material as being easiest to read, i.e. familiarity determining
perceived legibility. But why might there be an advantage in reading
speed for long lines (up to around 100 characters) on screen whereas in
print, a maximum of 70 characters is most legible? Here are some
suggestions:

-   The subjective judgements might provide a hint. Long line lengths on
    screen look quite daunting and this may encourage faster less
    detailed reading, such as scanning or skimming. This is consistent
    with comprehension being poorer with long line lengths, compared
    with moderate length lines. In fact, Ling and van Schaik (2006)
    suggest that longer line lengths should be used for quick scanning
    and shorter lines when text needs to be read more thoroughly.

-   The mechanics of reading texts on screen might also influence
    reading time. If required to scroll through texts, a longer line
    length will require less scrolling as there will be fewer lines. If
    we read whilst scrolling, we won't be slowed down by greater amounts
    of scrolling. If we don't, long line lengths will be more efficient
    to navigate. []{#Aside18 .anchor}([Aside 18](#aside-18))

-   A question remains as to why long lines might be less problematic in
    terms of the accuracy of the return sweep from the end of one line
    to the beginning of the next. As mentioned above, we tend to sit
    further away from a desktop computer screen than printed material
    which means that a line of text has a smaller visual angle. This
    smaller visual angle may make it easier to locate the correct
    position for our eyes when we do a return sweep. Another possible
    explanation is that the scrolling provides a cue to locating the
    next line, the upward movement of text reducing the difficulty with
    long lines. However, this is only likely to work if we scroll
    slowly, and may therefore be less relevant to touchscreen interfaces
    used on smartphones or tablets.

Question: Are you convinced by any of the above suggestions? If you
encounter a long line length on the screen of a desktop computer, do you
adjust the settings? If so, why do you do this? Are you influenced by
what you read in print?

#### Columns

Another means of varying line length is to set text in columns: multiple
columns generally result in shorter line lengths. There are a few
studies which have directly compared single and multiple columns in
print. The context for much of this research was exploring academic
printed journal designs which typically use multiple column formats. The
findings were not entirely consistent:

-   an advantage for narrow column setting (Foster, 1970)

-   single columns read faster than double columns (Poulton, 1959)

-   no difference between a single column and double column (Hartley,
    Burnhill, and Fraser, 1974)

-   with children aged around 11--12 years old there was slightly faster
    scanning for items in two columns (around 53 cpl) compared to one
    column (around 115 cpl). However, the longer line length was not
    problematic (Hartley, Burnhill, and Davis, 1978).

In the early days of online versions of newspapers and magazines, column
formats were typically used on the web, often as PDFs, until these were
re-designed and tailored for screen viewing. In a comparison of one and
three columns on screen (Figure 5.38), the single column (80 cpl) was
read faster with no differences in comprehension (Dyson and Kipping,
1997). This provides further support for the advantage of longer lines
described above. []{#Aside19 .anchor}([Aside 19](#aside-19))

Some interesting additional findings from the Dyson and Kipping study
are:

-   The advantage for this single column was restricted to a younger age
    group (18--24 year olds). Those over 25 years old read each version
    at a similar speed. We surmised that the younger participants were
    more familiar with reading web pages (around 1997).

-   Comprehension was better for faster readers in the three-column
    version than for slower readers. We speculated that faster readers
    may use a different reading pattern and be able to scan narrow
    columns in an efficient manner to absorb information.

Figure 5.38: Comparison of a single column (80 cpl) and three columns
(each of 25 cpl) used by Dyson and Kipping (1997).

### Line spacing

A very early study indicated that increasing line space from no
additional space (same as point size) to 7 points additional space led
to faster reading; with more than 7 points, reading slowed down
(Bentley, 1921). As the type sizes used were 6, 9 and 12 point, this is
rather generous use of line space (see Figure 5.39).

Figure 5.39: An indication of the material used by Bentley (1921). The
top row shows the three type sizes (12, 9 and 6 point) with no
additional line space. The bottom row has the same sizes with 7 points
additional space.

As discussed in Chapter 4, designers do not make decisions on individual
typographic variables, but consider the relationship between these
variables. The legibility of a particular line length may be influenced
by the amount of line spacing. The problem of inaccurate return sweeps
when reading a long line may be alleviated by introducing more space
between the lines. Paterson and Tinker studied type size, line length
and line spacing of print by systematically varying all three
(summarised in Tinker, 1965). The results were expressed as 'safety
zones' referring to limits of line length and line spacing within which
legibility would be satisfactory. These were generally between 1 and 4
points with not too much variation according to line length or type
size. What we may conclude from this is that line spacing should not be
too tight. Different typefaces are also perceived as needing different
amounts of line spacing to maximise their attractiveness or appeal for
reading with sans serif and italic needing one point more than serif
roman typefaces (Becker, Heinrich, von Sichowsky, and Wendt, 1970).

Such extensive research has not been carried out for reading from
screen. Given the rather general outcomes, it is questionable as to
whether it would be worth repeating for screen. One study with the
objective of generating design guidelines for web pages compared Arial
10 point type set in single, 1.5 or double line spacing. The researchers
found that the greater the line space, the better able participants were
to locate hyperlinks within texts and their preferences also followed
this pattern (Ling and van Schaik, 2007).

Locating hyperlinks is an information retrieval task which will not
involve the same sequence of eye movements as continuous reading. It is
plausible that words are more easily identified when there is more space
above and below them. This seems to be confirmed by a study which looked
at line spacing from the perspective of crowding (Chung, 2004). Crowding
has been discussed above in terms of letter and word spacing, i.e.
horizontal space, whereas this study looked at vertical space which
designers call line spacing. The study looked at the speed of
identifying words and the results indicated that an increase in space
above and below words increased reading speed. If we look directly at
the word so that it falls onto the fovea, we benefit from increases of
about 1.25 to 1.5 the standard spacing (see Figure 5.40) and after that
there is no additional benefit. However, for words in peripheral vision
which we use to guide where we land our eyes following a saccade, even
greater line spacing is beneficial. These effects are greater for
smaller type sizes suggesting that line spacing should not be set at a
consistent percentage of type size; small sizes need relatively more
additional space. Although Tinker's method and approach were very
different, and the results expressed in a different way, there is some
agreement with the crowding conclusions.

Figure 5.40: Variations in space above and below words (line space) used
by Chung (2004). The study found that 1.25x to 1.5x the standard spacing
(1x) increased the speed of identifying the middle word (bike).

These studies indicate that optimal line spacing may be similar in print
and on screen. The benefits of generous spacing may be an aid to
improving the accuracy of return sweeps in longer lines, but also a
means of alleviating crowding from adjacent lines.

### Paragraph denotation

The typical ways of denoting paragraphs are:

-   space between paragraphs

-   indented first line

-   new line but no indent

-   occasionally, indented first line and space between paragraphs

The first three of these formats plus no denotation have been compared
with 11--12 year olds scanning a text for missing words (Hartley,
Burnhill, and Davis, 1978). They found:

-   the version with space between paragraphs (1 in Figure 5.41) is
    scanned faster than the new line with no indent (3) and no
    denotation (4)

-   the version with additional space between paragraphs (1) is not
    scanned significantly faster than paragraphs denoted by an indent
    (2)

They conclude that as an indent uses less space, this is a more
cost-effective solution for print.

There does not appear to be any research which has pursued ways of
denoting paragraphs on screen. The cost is not a factor and typically
space is used to separate paragraphs (as in 1).

Figure 5.41: Methods of denoting paragraphs used by Hartley, Burnhill,
and Davis (1978): (1) additional space; (2) indented first line; (3)
starting new line; (4) no denotation.

Question: How do you typically denote paragraphs in print and on screen?
What criteria determine your decisions?

### Headings

Headings have the function of structuring a text, signalling the topic
covered in the following text, and providing an access point (i.e. to
locate a particular section). To serve these purposes, headings need to
be differentiated from surrounding text. Earlier in this chapter, bold
was considered as more appropriate than italic as a means of making
words stand out. Comparing all capitals and bold, newspaper headlines
were found to be located faster in bold lower case than all capitals
(Poulton, 1967). The lower case x-height was matched to the height of
capital letters as the typographic designer involved in this study
considered these to be optimal for the setting (see Figure 5.19). The
capitals were set at the size that were in current use in the newspaper.
This approach was in keeping with the practical purpose of the research
which was carried out at the request of the editor of *The Times*
newspaper.

Research comparing different graphic treatments of headings is however
very limited and there has been more emphasis on the linguistic function
of headings in facilitating processing of text and improving recall
(e.g. Hyönä and Lorch, 2004). We do know that the position of headings
(embedded or in the margin) did not matter for 14--15 year olds (Hartley
and Trueman, 1983). (Figure 5.42) We might therefore conclude that the
two solutions are similar in terms of usability.

Figure 5.42: Two positions of headings used by Hartley and Trueman
(1983): embedded (top) and in the margin (bottom).

One study took a different approach to identifying the most appropriate
typography for headings in text by exploring how easy it is to visually
discriminate among them using a set of cards (Williams and Spyridakis,
1992). They measured the time required to place 16 different heading
treatments in order of importance. The assumption is that if we can do
this quickly, this suggests that the headings are clearly different from
each other and consequently, they would work in a text to indicate the
hierarchical structure. The treatments used type size, position
(centred, flush left, indented, embedded), underlining, and case. Type
size was perceived as the most powerful cue to the hierarchical status
of the heading, which is understandable as there is little ambiguity in
this treatment: a larger heading means a higher level of heading. A more
subtle finding is that their participants found it easier to make
judgements when the headings varied along fewer dimensions (e.g. size
alone versus size and position).

Some care should be taken in applying these results to practice as
headings need to be differentiated from body text as well as from other
headings. []{#Aside20 .anchor}([Aside 20](#aside-20)). It may therefore
be desirable to change at least two dimensions to identify headings
(e.g. size, case, typeface or type variant) and indicate the hierarchy
of headings through one change, possibly size. There may be an
interesting difference in which variable is used in different countries.
In Mexico, upper case is frequently used for headings.

The space above and below headings appears not to have been specifically
investigated in an empirical study but the Gestalt laws of grouping and
organisation can inform practice (Panel 5.4). The Gestalt law of
proximity states that elements positioned closer together are seen as a
group and perceived to be more closely related than other elements in
the image or display. Headings need to be seen to relate to the text
below, rather than float between paragraphs or appear to group with the
text above. To enable this grouping, there needs to be more space above
a heading than below (Figure 5.43).

Figure 5.43: (1) The space above the heading is greater than below and
we perceive the heading as belonging to the following paragraph. (2) The
heading floats in between the paragraph above and below and therefore
does not perceptually group with the text to which it applies. (3) The
heading is closer to the text above and therefore does not appear to be
part of the following paragraph.

Panel 5.4: Description of Gestalt psychology

Gestalt psychology stems from a German philosophy of the mind and is
associated with Wertheimer (1923), Koffka (1935) and Köhler (1947). You
may have heard the famous phrase 'The whole is *greater* than the sum of
the parts'. This happens to be a mistranslation and should be 'The whole
is *other* than the sum of the parts'. What is meant is that the Gestalt
(shape or form or configuration) that we perceive is different from the
separate parts. This maxim should resonate with designers as we know
that typographic variables interact and need to be considered in
relation to one another.

Other than the law of proximity, there are laws of good continuation,
common fate, similarity, and Prägnanz or simplicity. The law of
simplicity says that we will perceive ambiguous or complex images as the
simplest form possible. This law is a good example of why Gestalt
psychology has been criticised by vision researchers. What is meant by a
simple form? This is a vague qualitative description that seems to evade
measurement. How do we measure what is simplest? One way is described in
Panel 5.3. There are now some quantitative approaches to Gestalt
perception but as yet, the studies' results are diverse and
heterogeneous with little theoretical coherence (Jäkel, Singh, Wichmann,
and Herzog, 2016). We are therefore left with an intuitively appealing
demonstration (Figure 5.43) that space can be used in typography to
support processing of text without any supporting evidence. The
demonstration works because we are encouraged to perceive a specific
grouping and it makes sense to do so -- the demonstration is convincing.

### Overall layout

Some studies have taken a global approach by looking at layouts which
vary a number of different features, acknowledging the importance of the
relationship between typographic variables. Two approaches have been
used:

-   identifying dimensions, [constructs](#construct) or variables used
    to make judgements

-   measuring the effects of 'good' and 'poor' layouts

#### Identifying dimensions, constructs or variables

A study (Grabinger, 1993) aiming to identify constructs which would
inform the design of screens used a notation system of 'x's and 'o's
(Twyman, 1981) to present examples to participants (Figure 5.44). The
typographic variables tested included various combinations of line
length, number of columns, line spacing, and paragraph denotation.
Participants judged the readability and studyability of the screens
using paired comparisons (see Chapter 4). The results indicated that the
organisation of screens and their visual interest were relevant to
judgements and single spacing and two columns resulted in more positive
judgements. Because a number of variables differed across screens, the
individual contribution of line spacing and number of columns cannot be
identified.

Figure 5.44: Example of the method used to indicate the layout of a
screen by Grabinger (1993). Headings are denoted by 'o's and paragraphs
by\' 'x's.

#### Effects of good and poor layout

A number of studies have tested different versions of documents that are
assumed to differ in legibility, based on previous research and
guidelines. Two such studies comparing screen formats found no
differences in performance measures but preference for an 'enhanced'
format (Muter and Maurutto, 1991) or a 'well-structured' text layout (de
Bruijn, de Mul, and van Oostendorp, 1992). A later study (Chaparro,
Shaikh, and Baker, 2005) also looking at screens resulted in the same
outcome: no difference in reading speed or comprehension but an enhanced
layout was preferred, regarded as less tiring to read, and satisfaction
scores were higher.

One recent study from an undergraduate dissertation at the University of
Reading, UK (Moys, Loveland, and Dyson, 2018) did find performance
differences between layouts varying in typographic quality. The 'good'
layout was read faster and there were differences in the accuracy of
recall. The results of this study are intriguing because the differences
in recall depend on whether the participants read print or eInk
(Kindle). The screen (eInk) version is as we would expect: more correct
answers when the layout is better. But the print version reverses this
result: recall is better with a poor layout. There is a possible
explanation as to why a poor layout improves performance (introduced in
Chapter 6) but it is difficult to explain why the results are different
for eInk and print.

Question: Do you have any suggestions as to why the results are
different?

Setting aside the lack of explanation for the outcomes, the study by
Moys, Loveland, and Dyson (2018) found differences in both reading speed
and recall, unlike the earlier studies. What might explain this
divergence? The studies vary in many ways but the most obvious reason is
likely to be the design of the test material. Unlike most of the
research summarised earlier in this chapter which focuses on one
typographic variable, these formats or layouts require the researchers
to produce well-designed material as well as the, arguably, easier task
of producing poorly designed material. Design guidelines need to be
interpreted and decisions made as to how to combine variables. As
discussed in Chapter 4, if the researchers lack design training, this is
not an easy task.

The studies conducted in the 1990s did not illustrate their test
material, which we know is fairly typical. Consequently, it is difficult
to state with any certainty that the materials used were not appropriate
exemplars of good and bad layouts. However, Muter and Maurutto (1991)
suggest that some of their 'enhancements' may have had a negative
effect, for example indenting every other line (see Figure 5.45,
bottom). This lack of a consistent left margin would probably create
problems with return sweeps of the eyes.

Figure 5. 45: Simulation of normal (top) and enhanced (bottom) formats
used by Muter and Maurutto (1991).

The later study (Chaparro, Shaikh, and Baker, 2005) does include
examples of 'enhanced' and 'poor' layouts which were created by 'expert
typographers'. An indication of the layouts is given in Figure 5.46. The
most evident aspect of poor practice is the splitting of text around an
image. In this case, the measures of performance may not have been
sufficiently sensitive to detect differences. For example, participants
were able to go back to the passages to look up the answers to
comprehension questions, with some time constraint. This is much easier
than needing to recall what has been read.

Figure 5.46: Simulation of the two layouts used by Chaparro, Shaikh, and
Baker (2005).

The test material used in Moys, Loveland, and Dyson (2018) was also
designed by someone with typographic training (the student author,
Loveland) and varied alignment, character spacing, line spacing, and
line length. The exact same typographic treatments were not implemented
for print and eInk. This would have caused both to have sub-optimal
typography, when the aim was good typography, and so would have been an
unnecessary compromise. Suitable typography for each was therefore used.
Poor typography used justified text (to introduce inconsistencies in
word spacing) tighter letter spacing, greater line spacing, and a
substantially longer line length (see Figure 5.47). The optimisation of
the layouts for the good examples, and manipulation of many typographic
attributes in creating the poor layout, may account for the differences
in performance. Also, a delay was introduced between reading the text
and answering multiple choice questions (without referring back to the
texts) which may have increased the sensitivity of this measure.

Figure 5.47: Four versions of text used by Moys, Loveland, and Dyson
(2018): (a) eInk poor layout;( b) eInk good layout; (c) print poor
layout; (d) print good layout.

Despite the positive reasons for including multiple variables together
in one study, most of the outcomes have rather limited value in
informing us of how to design to optimise legibility. They do indicate
that participants (readers) can judge which layouts are better, or
rather their judgements agree with the researchers' judgements.

Questions: Explain the difference between participants' ability to judge
which layouts are more legible and their judgements agreeing with
researchers'. Why might this distinction be important?

### Summary

This chapter has a large section on type which can make it seem the most
important aspect of legibility. However, we should not forget that the
way in which typographic and graphic designers *use* type is crucially
important to ease of reading. Beginning this chapter with research on
type signals that reading starts with identifying letters.

This overview is not exhaustive as there are factors which affect
legibility, such as contrast of type to background, reversed out type,
and size of margins, which have not been covered. I do not have a clear
rationale for excluding these, other than to suggest that the research
is rather limited and seems less relevant to current practice.

You will probably also have noticed that there are varying amounts of
research depending on the typographic attribute or variable. I would not
say that I have covered every research study but this unevenness
probably does mirror, to a reasonable extent, the relative volume of
work in each area. We might, therefore, ask why isn't there much work on
paragraph denotation? I can speculate that because the research that
exists does not show any differences, it is of less interest to other
researchers. Unlike some areas of research which can inform models and
theories of reading or overlap with other disciplines, the treatment of
paragraphs has direct application to design practice but little
theoretical significance. It is therefore falls to applied researchers
to pursue this topic. In other areas, valuable insights emerge from
combining results from different types of researchers with different
objectives.

Along with the uneven coverage, there are discrepancies in the
reliability and informativeness of the research. This is particularly
the case where little research exists or there are contradictory
results. In such cases, you may be left to make up your own mind about
what to take away from the overview, but I hope I have provided some
guidance.

In researching for this text, I was excited to discover a very large
number of studies published by a Spanish Professor of Psychology at the
University of Valencia: Manuel Perea. You will have seen his name cited
quite a few times in the overview. This research encouraged me as the
majority of legibility studies have been carried out in English and with
participants who are familiar with typographic conventions in the UK or
US. In a couple of places in this text, I have mentioned conventions
that may differ in Mexico (thanks to my editor). Although the studies by
Perea are done in Spain, they are extending the generality of the
results to the Spanish language and Perea is keen to consider any
possible influence of the language on the results (though not the
typographic conventions).

Along with his fellow researchers, Perea has recognised the potential
importance of typographic factors in reading and explored:

-   upper versus lower case

-   interletter spacing

-   upper versus lower halves of letters

-   bold type

-   serif versus sans serif

I am therefore hopeful that this recent interest from various groups of
researchers encourages others to delve further into the effects of
typography on reading to inform practitioners.

## 6 Beyond legibility research

### Broadening the scope

This book started with a broad definition of legibility and deliberately
avoided constraining the definition to the clarity of individual
characters. Taking this approach has given me the freedom to write about
typographic variables which may impact on legibility, readability,
usability (or other related concepts). Nevertheless, the content of this
book does reflect a rather traditional approach to legibility, i.e.
studies from over 50 years ago, with some updating to include recent
studies. There are also screen-based studies from over 30 years ago.

You may question the relevance of such old research to designing for
print or screen today -- I certainly do. My reasons to include older
material are because the studies:

-   provide a means of comparison with more recent research, as some
    results may still be valid

-   create a framework for introducing newer studies, by identifying
    variables and methods

-   fill gaps as there isn't yet a large body of research on the
    legibility of newer technologies such as mobile devices

I find a comparison of print and screen legibility of particular
personal interest as my own research was underpinned by a belief that we
shouldn't simply apply what we know about designing for print to screen
design. My view is that research on print legibility can both inform and
constrain screen design. General principles such as consistency, ease of
navigation, good legibility will apply to print and screen-based
technologies. However, the particularities of the screen, how we
interact with it, for what purposes (i.e. skimming, scanning, continuous
reading), and our familiarity and comfort with its use will impact on
legibility.

In this last chapter, I will explore:,

-   how familiarity might contribute to legibility

-   interacting with mobile devices

-   impressions of typographic material

-   a challenge to legibility

### Familiarity revisited

As indicated in Chapter 4, typeface familiarity has been addressed
directly by Beier and Larson (2013). They considered two perspectives
proposing that familiarity is based on:

-   amount of exposure to the typeface; this coincides with Licko's
    definition of legibility described in Panel 1.1: 'You read best what
    you read most'

-   common letter shapes resulting in a prototype or skeleton for each
    letter; this can be identified by superimposing common typefaces to
    reveal the parts that are shared by the typefaces (see Figure 6.1)

Figure 6.1: Based on Frutiger (1998, p202) who superimposed the letter
\'a\' in eight typefaces to demonstrate the skeleton form (darkest
area). Here the typefaces are Times, Palatino, Baskerville, Garamond,
Helvetica, Univers, Bodoni, and Minion.

The study aims to establish which of the two perspectives on familiarity
affects reading speed and preferences. Fonts were designed with:

-   common letter shapes, matching the skeletons

-   uncommon letter shapes, different from the skeletons

Fonts were selected which are:

-   known to participants (through previous exposure)

-   unknown (i.e. new) to participants as they were designed for the
    study by Sofie Beier

The fonts used in the study are listed in Table 6.1. There is a blank
cell in the table (uncommon letter shapes that are known fonts) because
we don't usually encounter fonts with uncommon letter shapes. You will
see examples of the uncommon letters shapes in Spencer Neue and PykeText
Neue in the bottom, right cell.

Table 6.1: fonts used in Beier and Larson (2013) study

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="5.395833333333333in"
height="2.06872375328084in"}

The study involves two short reading speed tests, separated by a longer
(20 minute) session where short stories are read in the typeface being
tested. Participants also answer questions about the reading experience
after each reading speed test. More detail of the method is provided in
Box 6.1.

The results do not give us a clear indication as to how familiarity
might contribute to legibility. There is still some ambiguity as to
whether the amount of exposure to a typeface is critical to legibility
or common letter shapes. With all fonts, participants read more
paragraphs in the post-test compared to the pre-test, meaning they read
faster in the second test. This might be interpreted as support for the
exposure explanation as the post-test came after reading more in the
font. However, this could also be a [practice effect](#practice-effect)
as we are likely to be better at a task the second time we carry it out.
The fonts with uncommon letter shapes (Spencer Neue and PykeTest Neue)
were read as fast as the ones with common letter shapes (known and
unknown).

The responses to questions did reveal that the uncommon letter shapes
are not considered enjoyable for reading in the future, nor a
comfortable reading experience, and cause participants to focus on the
typeface. Although these negative perceptions are less strong after more
exposure, they contrast with the positive responses to common letter
shapes. These judgements therefore support the explanation that we
desire the familiarity of letters which are close to the prototype or
skeleton.

If we are guided by readers' opinions, we will be conservative in our
letterform design in case readers choose not to read typefaces which
vary too much from those they have read before, even though they can be
read efficiently. This disparity between subjective judgements of what
is easy to read or preferred and how easily we actually read text occurs
with line lengths on screen (see Chapter 5). If we are conditioned to
perceive what we meet most often as easiest to read (common letter
shapes or moderate line lengths) then repeated exposure to the less
familiar may reduce the mismatch between our judgements and our
performance. However, reader's experiences with the less familiar need
to be perceived in a more positive manner -- a challenge for designers.

Question: If what people say they read best is not what they actually
read best, which result would you use to inform your design? Can you
think of any ways in which less familiar typographic treatments might be
introduced?

Box 6.1: Details of familiarity study method

Each participant repeats the procedure three times with different
typefaces (one from each of the cells in table 6.1). The procedure
consists of:

-   **Reading speed pre-test** which uses a version of the Tinker Speed
    of Reading test (described in Chapter 4). This involves reading a
    number of short paragraphs and identifying the word which spoils the
    meaning in each paragraph. The time is limited to 2 minutes.

-   **Pre-test questionnaire** where participants are asked to rate
    their level of agreement with a series of statements on a 7-point
    scale from +3 (I strongly agree) to -3 (I strongly disagree). The
    statements are:

    I will enjoy reading this typeface in the future

    I was constantly focusing on the typeface

    I still remember most of what I was reading

    This was a comfortable reading experience

    I have encountered this typeface before

-   **Exposure session** where participants read short stories in the
    typeface from the pre-test

-   **Reading speed post-test** which is identical to the pre-test
    except different short paragraphs are read

-   **Post-test questionnaire** where participants again rate their
    agreement on a 7-point scale to four of the five questions asked in
    the pre-test and a new one:

    I will enjoy reading this typeface in the future

    I was constantly focusing on the typeface

    I still remember most of what I was reading

    This was a comfortable reading experience

    I find the typeface easier to read now than I did at the beginning
    of the test

### Brief glances at text 

The type of reading we engage in, and our use of mobile devices, has
been addressed by a Clear Information Presentation Consortium which
started with MIT ([Massachusetts Institute of
Technology](http://web.mit.edu/)) AgeLab collaborating with Monotype
(font and technology specialists). They concern themselves with mobile
computing and an initial study (Reimer, Mehler, Dobres, Coughlin,
Metteson, Gould, Chahine and Levantovsky, 2014) used a driving
simulator. They compare menu selection with two typefaces that are
typical of those used in the car industry for vehicle displays:
Eurostile and Frutiger (see Figure 6.2). A distinction is made between
reading continuous text and the brief glances typical of reading
displays when driving. Their study indicated that men look less often
and spend less time glancing at menu text displays set in Frutiger
compared to Eurostile. Women did not show this difference between the
two typefaces. To explain this gender difference, the researchers
speculate that there may be perceptual differences associated with
gender or that women are more risk averse. The latter seems more
probable as women tended to spend less time looking at the displays and
therefore longer looking at the road (in the simulation).

Question: What is your interpretation of this gender difference?

Figure 6.2 Eurostile typeface (top) and Frutiger (bottom) used by Reimer
et al. (2014) and Dobres et al. (2016).

A subsequent study by the same group abandoned the driving simulator and
used a short exposure method (see Chapter 4 and Panel 4.3), adapting the
display time for each participant and using a [lexical decision
task](#lexical-decision-task) (Dobres, Chahine, Reimer, Gould, Mehler,
and Coughlin, 2016). They found that Frutiger is more legible than
Eurostile []{#Aside21 .anchor}([Aside 21](#aside-21)). Men and women
show the same pattern of results when the effects of driving behaviour
are removed. The previous results could therefore be explained by a
difference in women's approach to a task involving driving and not the
unlikely explanation of perceptual differences. (See Panel 6.1 for
comment on the change in method).

Panel 6.1: Comment on a change in method

The switch from a driving simulator to less natural reading conditions
(a method used by vision and reading researchers) is noteworthy as this
reverses the usual concern of designers for ecological or face validity.
The researchers acknowledge that the driving simulator setup has better
face validity but also requires more resources, making a large number of
studies impractical. Their use of a short exposure method indicates an
acceptance of a method based on speed of reading for legibility
research. This runs counter to a common perspective of designers that
faster reading is not necessarily of primary concern to them. However,
given the context of this research (interface design within vehicles),
speed of reading becomes a valid measure of legibility.

### Navigation through different menu styles

Chapter 1 mentioned usability as a way of describing the ease of *using*
print or screen material, whereas legibility involves reading. Usability
therefore encompasses navigation and although the term was used in
Chapter 5 to describe the use of headings in printed text, usability
commonly refers to interacting with screen-based technologies.

A study which uses smartphones to compare different styles of menu
design provides an example of a usability study with technology current
in 2014. The study uses a 3.5 inch (8.89 cm, diagonal measurement)
iPhone 4S, running iOS 7.1. This research was carried out for an
undergraduate dissertation at the University of Reading, UK
(Rudgard-Redsell, 2014). As the small screens of smartphones have fewer
pixels available to display content and navigation tools, various
different styles of menus have been built into operating systems. The
study compared the four menu styles shown in Figure 6.3 and measured
usability through the time taken to complete a task requiring navigation
to various screens. This performance measure was compared with their
subjective judgements of usability including:

-   perceived ease of use

-   perceived speed of use

-   preference for use

-   most often seen

-   aesthetic qualities

-   preferred style overall

The study described in Chapter 5, Box 5.2 compares actual and perceived
legibility (how we read compared with our judgements). Here we are
looking at a similar comparison of actual and perceived usability.

Figure 6.3: Four menu styles tested, from left to right: drop down, tab
bar, side menu, grid view (Rudgard-Redsell, 2014).

The study found that the tab bar menu style is navigated fastest and
also perceived as the fastest to use. However, the side menu is thought
to be easier to use and more aesthetically pleasing. This suggests that
the users placed greater emphasis on how much content can be shown on
the small screen, rather than speed of navigation. With the side bar,
when the menu is inactive, the menu only takes up the space of one
button to show and hide menu options. The tab bar has menu options
constantly visible on screen taking up more space.

The participants in the study were young undergraduate students at the
University of Reading, and most regularly used social media apps. The
author acknowledges that the results may have been different with less
experienced users, but the results inform us that users don't
necessarily prefer the fastest method of navigation. Instead, they like
a style they are comfortable with and consider aesthetically pleasing.
Developing software that matches these preferences is an important
aspect of user interface design and underlines the relationship between
functionality (usability or legibility) and aesthetics (see Chapter 1).

Question: If you were designing an interface, what would you prioritise?

### Aesthetics

Some recent work complements legibility research by allowing both
functional and aesthetic dimensions or constructs to emerge from
readers' perceptions of documents. The research extends the studies of
typeface semantics (described in Chapter 5) to look at the connotations
of different typographic layouts. These incorporate stylistic variables
(e.g. typeface and weight) and spatial or structural attributes (e.g.
columns and use of white space) (Moys 2014a, 2014b). The approach taken
reflects the multivariate nature of document design: considering the
interplay among typographic variables. It also allows participants to
comment on constructs which are relevant to them, rather than imposed by
the researcher. []{#Aside22 .anchor}([Aside 22](#aside-22))

Based on a preliminary study, magazine layouts with three patterns of
typographic differentiation (high, moderate, low) and controlled content
were used to investigate participants' impressions of documents. Figure
6.4 illustrates examples of the three typographic differentiation
patterns. The key themes that emerge are:

-   references to the appearance of the documents (i.e. stylistic and
    structural attributes)

-   evaluative comments that refer to the appeal to particular readers

-   references to the kinds of content, publications, genres, etc.

-   appraisals of credibility or appropriateness

-   consideration of how readers experience and interact with documents,
    relating to usability and reading

Figure 6.4: Three examples of magazine layouts designed to show
different levels of typographic differentiation: left has high
differentiation, middle has moderate and right has low.

The final theme relates to legibility and demonstrates that readers are
sensitive to the way in which typographic layouts may hinder or support
reading (Moys, 2014a). However, there is a broad range of impressions
which enables us to consider how legibility or usability sits alongside
evaluations of aesthetics, genre, and suitability for specific purposes.
As indicated in Chapter 1, legibility should not focus solely on the
physical characteristics of the text. Legibility is also determined by
the purpose and context for reading and the characteristics of the
reader. Participants perceive these many aspects relating to the
typography of documents when able to use their own
[constructs](#construct).

### The case against legibility \| disfluency

In the last section of Chapter 5, I describe a study where a poor layout
improves recall of content compared with a good layout when reading
print, but not with an eInk device. The print result therefore
contradicts the findings of legibility research whereas reading from an
eInk device confirms the findings.

I already have one unanswered question: why are the results different
for print and eInk? A second question is why does a layout, which past
research tells us is more difficult to read, help with recall. We should
remember that the poor layout in both print and eInk did slow down
reading, which fits with the results of legibility research.

A possible answer to the second question comes from some research which
has looked at how the font used to present material can affect the
fluency of processing the information (Song and Schwarz, 2010). One of
their studies compared a description of an exercise routine in Arial
with the same description in Brush (see Figure 6.5). Readers thought the
exercise would take nearly twice as long when read in the more
difficult-to-read font (Song and Schwarz, 2008). They misinterpreted the
difficulty in reading as a difficulty in doing the exercise.

Figure 6.5: Part of the exercise description used by Song and Schwarz
(2008) in Arial 12 point (top) and Brush 12 point (bottom), illustrated
in Song and Schwarz (2010).

Another later study found that fonts which are harder to read improve
learning (Diemand-Yauman, Oppenheimer, and Vaughan, 2011). The
explanation is based on the concept of [disfluency](#disfluency) which
refers to our [metacognitive experience](#metacognitive-experience) of
ease or difficulty. In the context of learning, it is an awareness of
the difficulty of reading less legible fonts and this is supposed to
make us put more effort into the task. By putting in more effort, we
process the text more thoroughly and therefore remember more. These
researchers demonstrated the benefit of hard-to-read fonts in a memory
task and in the real-life context of a classroom.

There are various problems with research on disfluency which are
explored fully in Box 6.2. Whilst it is tempting to ignore this work, I
think it is important to include here because:

-   one of my students found this curious result (Moys, Loveland, and
    Dyson, 2018)

-   the studies by Diemand-Yauman *et al*. (2011) receive a lot of
    attention: 541 citations[^10] and articles in popular press[^11]

-   studies which explore disfluency by using hard-to-read fonts, or
    other typographical variations, do not refer to legibility research;
    I think it is helpful to bring together these two fields of study

Perhaps because of the far-reaching implications of promoting
disfluency, there have been various studies checking whether they can
[replicate](#replicate) the results. A lot of these studies have failed
to find that making material harder to read improves recall or
comprehension. This indicates that disfluency effects are not robust
(repeatable) and efforts have been made to work out which
characteristics might affect the results. Suggestions include:

-   learner characteristics (e.g. academic abilities, spatial abilities,
    prior knowledge, motivation)

-   task characteristics (e.g. task difficulty, self-paced versus paced
    reading)

-   material characteristics (e.g. how different is the hard-to-read
    version)

Despite these investigations, we don't yet know the disfluent conditions
which might help us remember what we have read. A fairly consistent
result from these studies is that we are slower to read material that
has been deliberately made harder to read. This is hardly a surprise and
is essentially the same as the results of legibility research. I
wouldn't recommend using less legible material in your design practice
as we don't have good evidence that there is an improvement in retention
or recall. Although disfluency may sometimes have positive benefits,
communicators and educators are advised to present information in a form
that facilitates easy processing, promoting legibility (Song and
Schwarz, 2010, p111). Even Diemand-Yauman and colleagues warned us that
there is a danger of moving from disfluent material to illegible
material where it would hinder learning (Diemand-Yauman *et al*., 2011,
p114).

Returning to the first question in Chapter 1, how would you answer this
now?

Question: Is legibility a binary concept (i.e. legible or illegible) or
are there degrees of legibility, and perhaps also illegibility? If there
are degrees, how do we decide what is an acceptable level of legibility?

Box 6.2: Details of studies looking further into disfluency

A whole issue of a journal (*Metacognition and Learning*) is devoted to
gathering evidence to support or refute the disfluency argument to
determine whether this practice should be recommended for instructional
material. A reason to compile a special issue is that studies which do
not show any effects tend not to be published. This could mean that
there have been a lot of attempts to [replicate](#replicate)
Diemand-Yauman *et al.*'s study and these have been unsuccessful. The
results published in *Metacognition and Learning* are clear: the studies
testing the effect of disfluency failed to show better performance due
to disfluency. Some of the detail covers failed attempts to find the
same results and a few hints as to what might affect the outcomes of
such studies. I have included quite a lot of detail because of the
attention given to disfluency.

-   A possible [confound](#confounding-variable) with distinctiveness\
    Designers and psychologists have noticed that there may be a
    confound in these original studies. Disfluent materials are
    typically also unusual and might therefore be distinctive. Rummer,
    Schweppe, and Schwede (2016) explored whether the effects on
    learning of hard-to-read fonts may come from distinctiveness which
    attracts attention and results in better learning. They found no
    evidence for this and question the generality of disfluency effects.

-   Differences between screen and print\
    Although looking at mathematics problems rather than reading
    continuous texts, a study by Sidi, Ophir, and Ackerman (2016) is
    relevant to the results of the study by Moys, Loveland, and
    Dyson (2018) described in Chapter 5 which found a difference between
    screen and print for good and poor layouts. In both studies, there
    are no differences in performance between screen and print. But Sidi
    *et al*. found a difference between problems set in Arial 18 point
    black and those in Arial 9 point, italic, light grey (Figure 6.6).
    On screen, the maths problems set in the less legible font result in
    a better success rate. On paper, they find the reverse: a higher
    success rate in solving the problems when the font is legible. The
    two studies therefore both have results in different directions for
    screen and paper but with the maths problems, the results for paper
    are in line with what we would predict from legibility research. In
    Moys *et al*.'s study, the eInk results are predictable from
    legibility research. Therefore, although this new study does not
    explain what is [mediating](#mediating) these results, it does
    indicate that characteristics of the material (e.g. the medium) can
    influence the results and in rather complicated ways.

![](media/image2.jpeg){width="3.4683333333333333in"
height="1.1666666666666667in"}

Figure 6.6: Simulation of the fonts used for mathematics problems. The
study by Sidi, Ophir, and Ackerman (2016) was carried out in Hebrew.

-   Measurement of eye movements\
    Eye movements fail to show overall differences between clear
    material and blurred material. Reading times were shorter for less
    clear material on the first two screens but then longer on the last
    two. Readers may therefore be adjusting their reading strategy as
    they get used to the blurred (disfluent) material (Strukelj,
    Scheiter, Nystrom, and Holmqvist, 2016). The results from the
    initial and later screens cancel each other out.

The explanation for why disfluency improves learning is that less
legible text needs to be processed more deeply to decipher the text.
This deeper processing creates an additional [cognitive
load](#cognitive-load) and this uses the resources of [working
memory](#working-memory). This is sometimes described as '[desirable
difficulty](#desirable-difficulty)' where the additional load is
considered beneficial. Some research aims to clarify the underlying
mechanisms.

-   Disfluency or cognitive load\
    A study by Eitel, Kühl, Scheiter, and Gerjets (2014) tested whether
    introducing less legible text and pictures in multimedia instruction
    has a disfluency effect (improving learning) or has a detrimental
    effect on learning through increasing the cognitive load. Three out
    of four of the studies were not consistent with the disfluency
    explanation, but neither did they support a cognitive load
    explanation. The researchers suggest that a less legible text layout
    may increase the perceptual load but not affect the cognitive load.
    []{#Aside23 .anchor}([Aside 23](#aside-23))

-   Measurement of brain activity\
    The research stemming from the collaboration between
    neuropsychologists and a designer (Keage, Coussens, Kohler,
    Thiessen, and Churches, 2014) looking at brain activity suggests
    that less legible material might impose a cognitive load. When asked
    to do a task which requires recognising the same letter twice in a
    row with letters occurring in different typefaces, the brain
    activity they recorded indicates that not only is identifying the
    letter more difficult with less legible typefaces, but there is also
    a suggestion that more effort is necessary to integrate these into
    working memory. Figure 6.7 illustrates which typefaces were used.

Figure 6.7: Typefaces with more (Arial and Times New Roman) or less
(Lucida Blackletter and Edwardian Script) legible characteristics used
in the study of brain activity (Keage et al., 2014).

-   Working memory capacity\
    Those who promote the positive effects of disfluency ([]{#Aside24
    .anchor}[Aside 24](\l)) will say that increasing cognitive load and
    using up working memory capacity can be a good thing: a desirable
    difficulty. But this depends on our working memory capacity.
    Lehmann, Goussios, and Seufert (2016) used the typefaces shown in
    Figure 6.8, which were also used in the original study by
    Diemand-Yauman, Oppenheimer, and Vaughan (2011). Lehmann *et al*.
    found that people with a higher working memory capacity are better
    at retention (recall) and comprehension of less legible texts,
    whereas those with a lower working memory capacity are worse. If
    text is legible, it doesn't matter what our working memory capacity
    is. If we wish to design for a range of readers with varying working
    memory capacities we need to focus on making text more, and not
    less, legible.

Figure 6.8: Text in the study by Lehman et al. (2016) was set in a
legible (Arial) and less legible (Haettenschweiler) typeface. The less
legible text only improves performance if we have a high working memory
capacity, otherwise retention and comprehension are worse.

### Conclusion

This last chapter has moved away from mainstream legibility but has
hopefully provided an insight into related areas of research. Most of
these can inform design practice but I would treat the concept of
introducing disfluency with extreme caution. There are other ways to
encourage readers to engage with text that do not make reading more
difficult.

You may feel that it was unnecessary to read quite so much about
psychological processes involved in reading or the detail of
experiments. If so, I expect you have skipped over these parts or
skimmed them. The book is designed to enable you to do this, to choose
your own reading strategy. If you developed an interest in how we read
and how research is carried out, I hope you will pursue this interest in
the future. We need to update our research knowledge base to keep track
with changes in screen-based technologies and different reading habits.
As a typographic or graphic designer, you can make an invaluable
contribution, especially if you are open to collaborating with other
disciplines.

## Asides

######## Aside 1

I am ignoring Warde's point that readability is desirable, but not
legibility (as a larger and bolder type might be more legible, but not
more readable). This apparent contradiction stems from the distinction
(already described) between individual characters and continuous text.
\[[return](#Aside1)\]

######## Aside 2

The ways in which beginning readers are taught to read are influenced by
the different theoretical positions and assumptions or beliefs about how
we read, which have changed over time, influenced by research findings.
Letter-by-letter decoding is taught through practice in phonics; the
whole-word method involves memorising some words; the whole language
method encourages children to use story and sentence context to guess
the next word (which will only work some of the time).
\[[return](#Aside2)\]

######## Aside 3

Deciding what to prioritise is something you encounter when designing.
For example, you may decide to make a text appear less daunting by using
generous space between lines. This results in what appears to be a
longer text (more pages to turn or more scrolling or tapping). Therefore
the text may actually seem to be more, rather than less, daunting.
\[[return](#Aside3)\]

######## Aside 4

Even the founding editor of the oldest peer-reviewed design journal
(*Visible Language*, starting out as *The Journal of Typographic
Research*) was fed up with some comparisons of typefaces:\
'How many studies must we have on the comparative legibility of standard
reader typefaces --- Baskerville versus Times Roman versus Garamond
versus Gill Sans?' (Wrolstad, 1970, p37) \[[return](#Aside4)\]

######## Aside 5

The applied psychologist Poulton (1965) was aware of this confound and
adjusted sizes accordingly. His example has not been followed by all
researchers, possibly due to a lack of awareness or technical
limitations. \[[return](#Aside5)\]

######## Aside 6

More recently, a newer chart ([logMAR](\l)) has been introduced into
clinical practice, having been used initially as a research tool (Bailey
and Lovie, 1976). The chart is designed to ensure that the letters are
of almost equal legibility, each row has the same number of letters, and
consistent letter and line spacing. These adjustments to the Snellen
chart reflect the researchers' knowledge of the influence of crowding.
Other differences relate to the scaling of letter size.

The SLOAN font (see below) is used in both the Snellen and logMAR
charts. Louise Sloan designed ten letters (CDHKNORSVZ), a set of
[optotypes](#optotypes) (Sloan, 1959). \[[return](#Aside6)\]

> ![A picture containing logo Description automatically
> generated](media/image3.jpeg){width="4.435in"
> height="0.9833333333333333in"}

The SLOAN letters above come from the font file created by Denis Pelli
based on Sloan's specifications[^12]. Pelli includes the complete
uppercase alphabet, not just the 10 letters. The height and width of
letters are equal to the nominal point size (11 point in this example)
and adjoining characters touch.

######## Aside 7

In this study (Thiessen *et al*., 2015) the legibility of the typefaces
was determined by the researchers and based on criteria that combine
research findings and practical experience and expertise of
typographers. \[[return](#Aside7)\]

######## Aside 8

These studies are not necessarily couched as legibility research; often
emerging from a computer science/ergonomics/Human Computer Interaction
(HCI) environment, they may be regarded as usability studies.
\[[return](#Aside8)\]

######## Aside 9

A comparison of five e-readers and one paper book found very similar
reading behaviour, measured by eye movements. There was also a
suggestion that e-readers might improve legibility as readers are able
to adjust font size (Siegenthaler, Wurtz, Bergamin, and Groner, 2011).
\[[return](#Aside9)\]

######## Aside 10

These studies (and others involving Perea) were carried out in Spanish,
whereas all other research cited uses English, unless stated otherwise.
\[[return](#Aside10)\]

######## Aside 11

In psychology, and science in general, this would not be considered the
most parsimonious explanation, i.e. not the simplest. However, it would
be interesting to test. \[[return](#Aside11)\]

######## Aside 12

If you are wondering why the percentages add up to more than 100% (as I
was initially), this is because some letters are ambiguous in both their
lower and upper parts. \[[return](#Aside12)\]

######## Aside 13

There are differences between Mexico and the UK in the typography of
signs in the environment. For example, traffic signs in Mexico are in
upper case, whereas the UK changed from all capitals to lower case with
initial capitals. However, this is unlikely to affect our familiarity
with reading continuous text. \[[return](#Aside13)\]

######## Aside 14

The authors interpret this result as indicating that bold affects how
quickly we can get from the letter level to the word detector level
where we match the letters against stored words (lexical access).
\[[return](#Aside14)\]

######## Aside 15

This is interesting for the psychology of reading because it suggests
that the typographic features of the letters and words have an influence
at a semantic level, when we have accessed the meaning of the word.
\[[return](#Aside15)\]

######## Aside 16

Corbel was chosen to represent a high level of appropriateness, Tempus
Sans was considered neutral, and Vivaldi was chosen to represent a low
level of appropriateness. The results indicated that Corbel led to the
impression that the author of the CV was more knowledgeable, believable,
professional, mature, and experienced. \[[return](#Aside16)\]

######## Aside 17

Vertical rivers, where interword spaces line up with each other on
successive lines, may not be a problem except aesthetically. Studies of
eye movements suggest that we don't use the text of the next line to
preview what is coming next (Pollatsek, Raney, Lagasse, and Rayner,
1993). I am not entirely certain who first used the term 'rivers' but it
occurs in Dowding (1966, p5), who also refers to aesthetic
considerations, rather than legibility. \[[return](#Aside17)\]

######## Aside 18

The studies underpinning this discussion were carried out with desktop
computers and scrolling using up and down cursor or arrow keys (see
image). However, the formatting of text (line length and hence number of
lines) is also relevant to scrolling through text on mobile devices.
\[[return](#Aside18)\]

![](media/image4.jpeg){width="1.8818897637795275in"
height="0.7716535433070866in"}

######## Aside 19

This study included two versions of the single column: one which used
scrolling to move through the text and one which used a single keystroke
to get to the next screenful of text (described as 'paged'). The
three-column format was presented only in a paged version as columns can
only practically be read to the bottom of the screen. The single column
using paging was the one read fastest. \[[return](#Aside19)\]

######## Aside 20

Williams and Spyridakis (1992) are aware of the difference between

-   determining whether headings are the same or different, where
    variation on more dimensions will look more dissimilar

-   how headings relate to each other and interpreting whether size is
    more important than position, case or underlining

But their test material may have lost sight of normal practice, which
would not use 16 levels of heading and headings as large as 57 points.
\[[return](#Aside20)\]

######## Aside 21

Frutiger could be read at a specified level of accuracy when presented
for a shorter time than Eurostile. \[[return](#Aside21)\]

######## Aside 22

The technique used in Moys (2014a) uses a repertory grid procedure which
elicits [constructs](#construct) from participants, rather than
providing these. It is based on Kelly's personal construct theory of
personality (Kelly, 1955) and has been developed and applied to
different disciplines, such as the study by Bartram (1982) on typeface
semantics summarised earlier in Chapter 5. \[[return](#Aside22)\]

######## Aside 23

I have a problem in distinguishing between perception and cognition as I
don't know where perception stops and cognition begins. I therefore
treat this suggestion as an (over)enthusiastic attempt to explain the
results. \[[return](#Aside23)\]

######## Aside 24

The names which occur on many papers in support of disfluency are Daniel
Oppenheimer, Professor of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University[^13]
and Adam Alter, Associate Professor of Marketing, New York University's
Stern School of Business[^14]. \[[return](#Aside24)\]

## Glossary

####### Anti-aliasing

A software technique which reduces jaggies which are steps where there
should be curves or straight lines. They result from the screen having a
low resolution.

####### Applied research: 

Research which aims to solve practical real-world problems.

####### Cloze procedure:

A participant is asked to identify words that have been removed from a
text which tests their ability to understand the text.

####### Cognitive load:

The mental effort being used in [working memory](#working-memory). 

####### Confounding variable:

Something which varies along with the specific variable selected for
study. As a consequence, the results cannot be reliably interpreted.
Either one or the other variable, or both, might be responsible for the
results. This affects the internal validity of the study.

####### Construct:

A way of viewing the world; a person construes or gives meaning to their
own experience.

####### Continuous text***:*** 

Sometimes referred to as 'running text', this refers to sentences
arranged in paragraphs which are designed to be read in a linear manner
and can be distinguished from lists, etc.

####### Critical print size: 

The smallest character size for which reading is possible at maximum
speed.

####### Crowding:

In the context of reading, this is the effect of surrounding letters in
words on the ease of identifying letters.

####### Desirable difficulty:

This typically describes a learning task that requires a lot of effort
to do, but this amount of effort is an advantage as it improves
performance over the longer term (e.g. retention of information). The
term was first used by Robert Bjork in 1994.

####### Developmental dyslexia: 

People diagnosed with developmental dyslexia have difficulty in reading
accurately and fluently which cannot be explained by their intellectual
ability or educational opportunities.

####### Disfluency:

The subjective (metacognitive) experience of ease or difficulty when
completing a mental task.

####### Ecological hypothesis:

In this context, a theory which proposes that we have evolved to be good
at processing certain visual signs that are found in our physical
environment.

####### Ecological validity:

The extent to which a study can be generalised to real life settings.
This is sometimes called face validity.

####### External validity:

The extent to which the results of a study can be generalized to other
situations and to other people. External refers to outside the study.

####### Internal validity: 

This is determined by how well the study has been designed to avoid
confounding variables, and describes the relationship between the
outcomes of the study and the object of study.

####### Letter frequency:

The number of times a letter appears, on average, in the language.

####### Lexical decision task:

Participant indicates whether the item is a word or not a word.

####### logMAR:

Logarithm of the Minimum Angle of Resolution

####### Manuscripts:

An author's text that has not yet been published. This was originally
handwritten but is now always a digital version.

####### Mediating: 

In the context of an experiment, mediating refers to something that is
causing the result.

####### Metacognitive experience:

This describes our awareness of what we are experiencing, such as
whether something is easy (fluent) or difficult (disfluent) to read.

####### Nominal point size:

The number given to the size of the font, even though it may not match
any dimension of the letters and varies from font to font.

####### Optotypes:

Standardised symbols for testing vision.

####### Perceptual salience:

Drawing attention, standing out, easily perceived.

####### Perceptual span:

The area around the current eye fixation position which contains useful
information: about 4 letters to the left and 15 letters to the right. We
can fully discriminate about 10 letters.

####### Practice effect:

This is a recognised effect of repeating a similar test and is usually
improvement in performance due to familiarity with the test. In research
studies, this effect is controlled by varying the order of different
conditions of the experiment across participants.

####### Priming

A technique used in psychological studies where presenting one stimulus
(e.g. part of a letter) before presenting another stimulus (e.g. whole
letter) can speed up a response.

####### Pseudoword:

A non-word that appears to be a word in the language, but isn't, e.g.
cirtion, sibrin

####### Psychophysics:

Refers to measurements using experiments which determine how reading
performance (often reading speed) is affected by physical properties of
text (e.g. type size, typeface). It is therefore measuring the
relationship between the physical and the psychological.

####### Pure research:

Also called 'basic' or 'theoretical' research, the aim is to further
develop scientific theory and understanding, as opposed to solving a
particular problem (which is the province of applied research).

####### Replicate:

If an experiment can be reproduced by different researchers, using the
same or very similar methods and materials, and the results are the
same, we can say that the study has been replicated. This is an
important means of ensuring that the research is robust.

####### Robust research:

Research which can be relied upon and can withstand changes so we can
assume that the results will apply to more than one situation.

####### Short exposure method:

Presenting a letter or word for a very brief time which increases the
sensitivity of the method.

####### Standardised test:

A standardised reading test is a device to measure reading which has
been checked for reliability and validity (see Chapter 4: Key criteria)
and is typically sold by a publisher.

####### Threshold legibility:

The smallest size that we can recognise letters and words.

####### Typographic cueing:

Use of bold, italic, underline, capitals, etc. to differentiate a word
or phrase from surrounding text.

####### Visual or vision science:

Studies of vision and how visual information is processed by people and
by computers.

####### Working memory:

A cognitive system with limited capacity where we temporarily hold
information for processing.

## Bibliography

Arditi, A., & Cho, J. (2007). Letter case and text legibility in normal
and low vision. *Vision Research, 47*(19), 2499--2505.

Bailey, I. L., & Lovie, J. E. (1976). New design principles for
visual-acuity letter charts. *American Journal of Optometry and
Physiological Optics, 53*(11), 740--745.

Bartram, D. (1982). The perception of semantic quality in type:
Differences between designers and non-designers. *Information Design
Journal, 3*(1), 38--50.

Baudin, F. (1967). Miles A. Tinker, 'Bases for effective reading'.
*Journal of Typographic Research,* 1(2), 204207.

Becker, D., Heinrich, J., von Sichowsky, R., & Wendt, D. (1970). Reader
preferences for typeface and leading. *Journal of Typographic Research,
4*(1), 61--66.

Beier, S. (2012). *Reading letters: Designing for legibility*.
Amsterdam: BIS Publishers.

Beier, S. (2016). Letterform research: An academic orphan. *Visible
Language, 50*(2).

Beier, S., & Dyson, M. C. (2014). The influence of serifs on \'h\' and
\'i\': Useful knowledge from design-led scientific research. *Visible
Language, 47*(3), 74--95.

Beier, S., & Larson, K. (2010). Design improvements for frequently
misrecognized letters. *Information Design Journal, 18*(2), 118--137.

Beier, S., & Larson, K. (2013). How does typeface familiarity affect
reading performance and reader preference? *Information Design Journal,
20*(1), 16--31.

Bentley, M. (1921). Leading and legibility. *Psychological Monographs:
General and Applied, 30*(3), 48--61.

Bernard, M., Lida, B., Riley, S., Hackler, T., & Janzen, K. (2002). A
comparison of popular online fonts: Which size and type is best?
\[Electronic Version\]. *Usability News*, 4(1) from
<http://usabilitynews.org/a-comparison-of-popular-online-fonts-which-size-and-type-is-best/>.

Bernard, M., Mills, M., Peterson, M., & Storrer, K. (2001). A comparison
of popular online fonts: Which is best and when? \[Electronic Version\].
*Usability News*, 3(2) from
<http://usabilitynews.org/a-comparison-of-popular-online-fonts-which-is-best-and-when/>.

Besner, D., Coltheart, M., & Davelaar, E. (1984). Basic processes in
reading: Computation of abstract letter identities. *Canadian Journal of
Psychology, 38*, 126--134.

Beymer, D., Russell, D., & Orton, P. (2008). An eye tracking study of
how font size and type influence online reading. In *Proceedings of the
22nd British HCI group annual conference on people and computers:
Culture, creativity, interaction* (Vol. 2, pp. 15--18). Liverpool, UK:
British Computer Society.

Bjork, R. A. (1994). Memory and metamemory considerations in the
training of human beings. In J. Metcalfe & A. Shimamura (Eds.),
*Metacognition: Knowing about knowing* (pp. 185--205). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Boyarski, D., Neuwirth, C., Forlizzi, J., & Regli, S. H. (1998). A study
of fonts designed for screen display. In C. M. Karat (Ed.), *CHI 98:
Human factors in computing systems* (pp. 87--94). Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley, ACM Press.

Bringhurst, R. (1992). *The elements of typographic style*. Point
Roberts, WA Hartley & Marks.

British Standards Institution (2005). *BS 7000:6:2005: Design management
systems: Part 6: Managing inclusive design* -- *guide*. London, England:
BSI.

Brumberger, E. R. (2003). The rhetoric of typography: The awareness and
impact of typeface appropriateness. *Technical Communication*, 50(2),
224--231.

Cattell, J. M. (1886). The time taken up by cerebral operations. *Mind,
11*(43), 377--392.

Chaparro, B. S., Shaikh, A. D., & Baker, J. R. (2005). Reading online
text with a poor layout: Is performance worse? \[Electronic Version\].
*Usability News* from
https://researchinuserexperience.wordpress.com/2005/02/13/reading-online-text-with-a-poor-layout-is-performance-worse/

*Chapman-Cook speed of reading test*. 1923, 1924: Grades 4--8.
Educational Test Bureau, Chapman, J. C.

Chung, S. T. L. (2002). The effect of letter spacing on reading speed in
central and peripheral vision. *Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual
Science, 43*(4), 1270--1276.

Chung, S. T. L. (2004). Reading speed benefits from increased vertical
word spacing in normal peripheral vision. *Optometry and Vision Science,
81*(7), 525--535.

de Bruijn, D., de Mul, S., & van Oostendorp, H. (1992). The influence of
screen size and text layout on the study of text. *Behaviour &
Information Technology, 11*(2), 71--78.

Diemand-Yauman, C., Oppenheimer, D. M., & Vaughan, E. B. (2011). Fortune
favors the bold (and the italicized): Effects of disfluency on
educational outcomes. *Cognition, 118*(1), 111--115.

Dillon, A. (1992). Reading from paper versus screens: A critical review
of the empirical literature. *Ergonomics, 35*(10), 1297--1326.

Dillon, A. (2004). *Designing usable electronic text* (2nd ed.). Boca
Raton: CRC Press.

Dillon, A., Kleinman, L., Bias, R., Choi, G. O., & Turnbull, D. (2004).
Reading and searching digital documents: An experimental analysis of the
effects of image quality on user performance and perceived effort.
*Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology*, *41*(1), 267--273.

Dobres, J., Chahine, N., Reimer, B., Gould, D., Mehler, B., & Coughlin,
J. F. (2016). Utilizing psychophysical techniques to investigate the
effects of age, typeface design, size, and display polarity on glance
legibility. *Ergonomics*, 1--57.

Dowding, G. (1966). *Finer points in the spacing and arrangement of
type*. London: Wace.

Doyle, J. R., & Bottomley, P. A. (2004). Font appropriateness and brand
choice. *Journal of Business Research, 57*(8), 873--880.

Doyle, J. R., & Bottomley, P. A. (2006). Dressed for the occasion:
Font-product congruity in the perception of logotype. *Journal of
Consumer Psychology, 16*(2), 112--123.

Dyson, M. C. (2004). How physical text layout affects reading from
screen. *Behaviour & Information Technology, 23*(6), 377--393.

Dyson, M. C. (2005). How do we read text on screen? In H. v. Oostendorp,
L. Breure & A. Dillon (Eds.), *Creation, use, and deployment of digital
information* (pp. 279--306). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Dyson, M. C., & Beier, S. (2016). Investigating typographic
differentiation: Italics are more subtle than bold for emphasis.
*Information Design Journal, 22*(1), 3--18.

Dyson, M. C., & Kipping, G. J. (1997). The legibility of screen formats:
Are three columns better than one? *Computers & Graphics, 21*(6),
703--712.

Eitel, A., Kühl, T., Scheiter, K., & Gerjets, P. (2014). Disfluency
meets cognitive load in multimedia learning: Does harder-to-read mean
better-to-understand? *Applied Cognitive Psychology, 28*(4), 488--501.

Fiset, D., Blais, C., Arguin, M., Tadros, K., Éthier-Majcher, C., Bub,
D., *et al*. (2009). The spatio-temporal dynamics of visual letter
recognition. *Cognitive Neuropsychology, 26*(1), 23--35.

Fiset, D., Blais, C., Éthier-Majcher, C., Arguin, M., Bub, D., &
Gosselin, F. (2008). Features for identification of uppercase and
lowercase letters. *Psychological Science, 19*(11), 1161--1168.

Foster, J. J. (1970). A study of the legibility of one- and two-column
layouts for bps publications. *Bulletin of the British Psychological
Society, 23*, 113--114.

Foster, J. J. (1980). *Legibility research 1972--1978: A summary*.
London: Graphic Information Research Unit, Royal College of Art.

Fox, D., Chaparro, B. S., & Merkle, E. (2007). Examining legibility of
the letter "e" and number "0" using classification tree analysis
\[Electronic Version\]. *Usability News*, 9(2) from
<http://usabilitynews.org/examining-legibility-of-the-letter-e-and-number-0-using-classification-tree-analysis/>.

Frutiger, A. (1998). *Signs and symbols: Their design and meaning*.
London: Ebury Press.

Gill, E. (1931). *An essay on typography*. London: Dent.

Grabinger, R. S. (1993). Computer screen designs: Viewer judgements.
*Educational Technology and Research Development, 41*(2), 35--73.

Grainger, J. (2016). Orthographic processing and reading. *Visible
Language, 50*(2), 132--153.

Grainger, J., & Whitney, C. (2004). Does the huamn mnid raed wrods as a
wlohe? *Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8*(2), 58--59.

Grainger, J., Dufau, S., & Ziegler, J. C. (2016). A vision of reading.
*Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20*(3), 171--179.

Grainger, J., Lété, B., Bertand, D., Dufau, S., & Ziegler, J. C. (2012).
Evidence for multiple routes in learning to read. *Cognition, 123*(2),
280--292.

Grainger, J., Rey, A., & Dufau, S. (2008). Letter perception: From
pixels to pandemonium. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12*(10), 381--387.

Gregory, M., & Poulton, E. C. (1970). Even versus uneven right-hand
margins and the rate of comprehension in reading. *Ergonomics, 13*(4),
427--434.

Haber, R. N., & Schindler, R. M. (1981). Error in proofreading --
evidence of syntactic control of letter processing. *Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 7*(3),
573--579.

Harris, J. (1973). Confusions in letter recognition. *Printing
Technology, 17*(2), 29--34.

Hartley, J., & Trueman, M. (1983). The effects of headings in text on
recall, search and retrieval. *British Journal of Educational
Psychology, 53*(JUN), 205--214.

Hartley, J., Burnhill, P., & Davis, L. (1978). The effects of line
length and paragraph denotation on the retrieval of information from
prose text. *Visible Language, 12*(2), 183--194.

Hartley, J., Burnhill, P., & Fraser, S. (1974). Typographical problems
of journal design. *Applied Ergonomics, 5*(1), 15--20.

Hazlett, R. L., Larson, K., Shaikh, A. D., & Chaparro, B. S. (2013). Two
studies on how a typeface congruent with content can enhance onscreen
communication. *Information Design Journal, 20*(3), 207--219.

Huey, E. B. (1908/1968). *The psychology and pedagogy of reading*.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

Hughes, L., & Wilkins, A. (2000). Typography in children's reading
schemes may be suboptimal: Evidence from measures of reading rate.
*Journal of Research in Reading, 23*(3), 314--324.

Hyönä, J., & Lorch, R. F. (2004). Effects of topic headings on text
processing: Evidence from adult readers' eye fixation patterns.
*Learning and Instruction 14*, 131--152.

Jäkel, F., Singh, M., Wichmann, F. A., & Herzog, M. H. (2016). An
overview of quantitative approaches in Gestalt perception. *Vision
Research, 126*, 3--8.

Joo, S. J., White, A. L., Strodtman, D. J., & Yeatman, J. D. (2018).
Optimizing text for an individual\'s visual system: The contribution of
visual crowding to reading difficulties. *Cortex*, *103*, 291--01.

Juni, S., & Gross, J. S. (2008). Emotional and persuasive perception of
fonts. *Perceptual and Motor Skills, 106*(1), 35--42.

Keage, H. A. D., Coussens, S., Kohler, M., Thiessen, M., & Churches, O.
F. (2014). Investigating letter recognition in the brain by varying
typeface: An event-related potential study. *Brain and Cognition, 88*,
83--89.

Kelly, G. (1955). *The psychology of personal constructs*. New York:
Norton.

Kintsch, W., & van Dijk, T. A. (1978). Toward a model of text
comprehension and production. *Psychological Review, 85*(5), 363--394.

Koffka, K. (1935). *Principles of Gestalt psychology*. London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul.

Köhler, W. (1947). *Gestalt psychology: An introduction to new concepts
in modern psychology*. New York: Liveright Publishing Corporation.

Kolers, P. A., Duchnicky, R. L., & Ferguson, D. C. (1981). Eye movement
measurement of readability of CRT displays. *Human Factors, 23*(5),
517--527.

Köpper, M., Mayr, S., & Buchner, A. (2016). Reading from computer screen
versus reading from paper: Does it still make a difference? *Ergonomics,
59*(5), 615--632.

Lanthier, S. N., Risko, E. R., Stolzh, J. A., & Besner, D. (2009). Not
all visual features are created equal: Early processing in letter and
word recognition. *Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16*(1), 67--73.

Larson, K. (2004). The science of word recognition or how I learned to
stop worrying and love the bouma \[Electronic Version\] from
<http://www.microsoft.com/typography/ctfonts/WordRecognition.aspx>.

Larson, K., & Carter, M. (2016). Sitka: A collaboration between type
design and science. In M. C. Dyson & C. Y. Suen (Eds.), *Digital fonts
and reading* (pp. 37--53). World Scientific.

Larson, K., Hazlett, R. L., Chaparro, B. S., & Picard, R. W. (2006).
Measuring the aesthetics of reading. In *People and computers XX:
Proceedings of HCI 2006,* (Vol. 1, pp. 41--56): British Computer
Society.

Legge, G. E. (2007). *Psychophysics of reading in normal and low
vision*. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Legge, G. E., & Bigelow, C. A. (2011). Does print size matter for
reading? A review of findings from vision science and typography.
*Journal of Vision, 11*(5):8, 1--22.

Legros, L. A., & Grant, J. C. (1916). *Typographical printing-surfaces:
The technology and mechanism of their production*. London: Longmans,
Green.

Lehmann, J., Goussios, C., & Seufert, T. (2016). Working memory capacity
and disfluency effect: An aptitude-treatment-interaction study.
*Metacognition and Learning, 11*(1), 89--105.

Lewis, C., & Walker, P. (1989). Typographic influences on reading.
*British Journal of Psychology, 80*(2), 241--257.

Licko, Z. (1990). Do you read me? *Emigre, 15*, 8--13.

Ling, J., & van Schaik, P. (2006). The influence of font type and line
length on visual search and information retrieval in web pages.
*International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 64*(5), 395--404.

Ling, J., & van Schaik, P. (2007). The influence of line spacing and
text alignment on visual search of web pages. *Displays, 28*, 60--67.

Lonsdale, M. (2007). Does typographic design of examination materials
affect performance? *Information Design Journal, 15*(2), 114--138.

Lonsdale, M., Dyson, M. C., & Reynolds, L. (2006). Reading in
examination-type situations: The effects of text layout on performance.
*Journal of Research in Reading, 29*(4), 433--453.

Lund, O. (1999). *Knowledge construction in typography: The case of
legibility research and the legibility of sans serif typefaces*.
Unpublished PhD thesis, University of Reading, UK.

Macaya, M., & Perea, M. (2014). Does bold emphasis facilitate the
process of visual-word recognition? *Spanish Journal of Psychology,
17*(e2), 1--5.

MacDonald-Ross, M., & Waller, R. (1975). Criticism, alternatives and
tests: A conceptual framework for improving typography *Programmed
Learning and Educational Technology, 12*(2), 75--83.

Martelli, M., Majaj, N. J., & Pelli, D. G. (2005). Are faces processed
like words? A diagnostic test for recognition by parts. *Journal of
Vision, 5*(1), 58--70.

McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1981). An interactive activation
model of context effects in letter perception; part 1. An account of
basic findings. *Psychological Review, 88*(5), 375--407.

Monk, A. F., & Hulme, C. (1983). Errors in proofreading -- evidence for
the use of word shape in word recognition. *Bulletin of the British
Psychological Society, 36*(FEB), A21--A21.

Moret-Tatay, C., & Perea, M. (2011). Do serifs provide an advantage in
the recognition of written words? *Journal of Cognitive Psychology,
23*(5), 619--624.

Morris, R. A., Aquilante, K., Yager, D., & Bigelow, C. (2002). P-13:
Serifs slow RSVP reading at very small sizes, but don\'t matter at
larger sizes. *SID Symposium Digest of Technical Papers, 33*(1),
244--247.

Moys, J. L. (2014a). Investigating readers' impressions of typographic
differentiation using repertory grids. *Visible Language, 47*(3),
96--123.

Moys, J. L. (2014b). Typographic layout and first impressions -- testing
how changes in text layout influence readers\' judgments of documents.
*Visible Language, 48*(1), 41--67.

Moys, J. L., Loveland, P., & Dyson, M. C. (2018). Eink versus paper:
Exploring the effects of medium and typographic quality on recall and
reading speed. *Visible Language, 52*(3), 74--95.

Muter, P., & Maurutto, P. (1991). Reading and skimming from computer
screens and books: The paperless office revisited? *Behaviour &
Information Technology, 10*(4), 257--266.

*Nelson-Denny reading test*. (1981) Chicago, Illinois: The Riverside
Publishing Company.

New, B., & Grainger, J. (2011). On letter frequency effects. *Acta
Psychologica*, *138*(2), 322--328.

Ovink, G. W. (1938). *Legibility, atmosphere-value and forms of printing
type*. Leiden: Sijthoff.

Paap, K. R., Newsome, S. L., & Noel, R. W. (1984). Word shape\'s in poor
shape for the race to the lexicon. *Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 10*, 413--428.

Paterson, D. G., & Tinker, M. A. (1932). Studies of typographical
factors influencing speed of reading: X. Style of type face. *Journal of
Applied Psychology, 16*(6), 605--613.

Paterson, D. G., & Tinker, M. A. (1940). *How to make type readable*.
New York: Harper and Row.

Pelli, D. G., & Tillman, K. A. (2007). Parts, wholes, and context in
reading: A triple dissociation. *Plos One, 2*(8), e680.

Pelli, D. G., Burns, C. W., Farell, B., & Moore-Page, D. C. (2006).
Feature detection and letter identification. *Vision Research 46*(28),
4646--4674.

Perea, M. (2012). Revisiting Huey: On the importance of the upper part
of words during reading. *Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 19*(6),
1148--1153.

Perea, M. (2013). Why does the APA recommend the use of serif fonts?
*Psicothema, 25*(1), 13--17.

Perea, M., & Gomez, P. (2012a). Increasing interletter spacing
facilitates encoding of words. *Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 19*(2),
332--338.

Perea, M., & Gomez, P. (2012b). Subtle increases in interletter spacing
facilitate the encoding of words during normal reading. *Plos One,
7*(10).

Perea, M., Giner, L., Marcet, A., & Gomez, P. (2016). Does extra
interletter spacing help text reading in skilled adult readers? *Spanish
Journal of Psychology, 19*.

Perea, M., Moret-Tatay, C., & Gomez, P. (2011). The effects of
interletter spacing in visual-word recognition. *Acta Psychologica,
137*(3), 345--351.

Perea, M., Panadero, V., Moret-Tatay, C., & Gómez, P. (2012). The
effects of inter-letter spacing in visual-word recognition: Evidence
with young normal readers and developmental dyslexics. *Learning and
Instruction, 22*(6), 420--430.

Perea, M., Rosa, E., & Marcet, A. (2017). Where is the locus of the
lowercase advantage during sentence reading? *Acta Psychologica, 177*,
30--35.

Petit, J. P., & Grainger, J. (2002). Masked partial priming of letter
perception. *Visual Cognition, 9*(3), 337--353.

Pollatsek, A., Raney, G. E., Lagasse, L., & Rayner, K. (1993). The use
of information below fixation in reading and in visual-search. *Canadian
Journal of Experimental Psychology--Revue Canadienne de Psychologie
Experimentale, 47*(2), 179--200.

Poulton, E. C. (1959). Effects of printing types and formats on the
comprehension of scientific journals. *Nature, 184*, 1824--1825.

Poulton, E. C. (1965). Letter differentiation and rate of comprehension
in reading. *Journal of Applied Psychology, 49*(5), 358--362.

Poulton, E. C. (1967). Searching for newspapers headlines printed in
capitals or lower-case letters. *Journal of Applied Psychology, 51*(5),
417--425.

Poynor, R. (1999). The great type debate rages on. *Graphis, 319,*
14,16.

Pyke, R. L. (1926). *Report on the legibility of print*: Her Majesty\'s
Stationery Office

Rayner, K. (1986). Eye-movements and the perceptual span in beginning
and skilled readers. *Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 41*(2),
211--236.

Rayner, K., & Pollatsek, A. (1989). *The psychology of reading*.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Rayner, K., White, S. J., Johnson, R. L., & Liversedge, S. P. (2006).
Raeding wrods with jubmled lettres -- there is a cost. *Psychological
Science, 17*(3), 192--193.

Rehe, R. F. (1979). *Typography: How to make it most legible*. Carmel,
Indiana: Design Research Publications.

Reimer, B., Mehler, B., Dobres, J., Coughlin, J. F., Matteson, S.,
Gould, D., *et al*. (2014). Assessing the impact of typeface design in a
text-rich automotive user interface. *Ergonomics, 57*(11), 1643--1658.

Rey, A., Dufau, S., Massol, S., & Grainger, J. (2009). Testing
computational models of letter perception with item-level event-related
potentials. *Cognitive Neuropsychology, 26*(1), 7--22.

Reynolds, L. (1984). The legibility of printed scientific and technical
information. In R. Easterby & H. Zwaga (Eds.), *Information design: The
design and evaluation of signs and printed material* (pp. 187--208).
Chichester: John Wiley.

Reynolds, L., & Simmonds, D. (1984). The legibility of type. In
*Presentation of data in science* (pp. 1--19): Springer Netherlands.

Roethlein, B. E. C. (1912). The relative legibility of different faces
of printing types. *The American Journal of Psychology, 23*(1), 1--36.

Rosa, E., Perea, M., & Enneson, P. (2016). The role of letter features
in visual-word recognition: Evidence from a delayed segment technique.
*Acta Psychologica, 169*, 133--142.

Rudgard-Redsell, P. (2014). *The perceived versus actual usability of
mobile navigation designs.* Unpublished BA dissertation, University of
Reading, UK.

Rumelhart, D. E., & Siple, P. (1974). Process of recognizing
tachistoscopically presented words. *Psychological Review, 81*(2),
99--118.

Rummer, R., Schweppe, J., & Schwede, A. (2016). Fortune is fickle:
Null-effects of disfluency on learning outcomes. *Metacognition and
Learning, 11*(1), 57--70.

Sanford, E. C. C. (1888). The relative legibility of the small letters.
*The American Journal of Psychology, 1*(3), 402--435.

Sanocki, T. (1987). Visual knowledge underlying letter perception:
Font-specific schematic tuning. *Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 13*(2), 267--278.

Sanocki, T. (1988). Font regularity constraints on the process of letter
recognition. *Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 14*(3), 472--480.

Shaikh, A. D., & Chaparro, B. (2016). Perception of fonts: Perceived
personality traits and appropriate uses. In M. C. Dyson & C. Y. Suen
(Eds.), *Digital fonts and reading* (pp. 226--247). New Jersey, London:
World Scientific.

Shaikh, A. D., & Fox, D. (2008). Does the typeface of a resume impact
our perception of the applicant.
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Does-the-Typeface-of-a-Resume-Impact-Our-Perception-Shaikh-Fox/b2b96fd092271f1aeb4001f5db09f2b746f6adfa

Sheedy, J. E., Subbaram, M., Zimmerman, A., & Hayes, J. R. (2005). Text
legibility and the letter superiority effect. *Human Factors, 47*(4),
797--815.

Sheedy, J., Tai, Y.-C., Subbaram, M., Gowrisankaran, S., & Hayes, J.
(2008). Cleartype sub-pixel text rendering: Preference, legibility and
reading performance. *Displays, 29*(2), 138--151.

Sidi, Y., Ophir, Y., & Ackerman, R. (2016). Generalizing screen
inferiority -- does the medium, screen versus paper, affect performance
even with brief tasks? *Metacognition and Learning, 11*(1), 15--33.

Siegenthaler, E., Wurtz, P., Bergamin, P., & Groner, R. (2011).
Comparing reading processes on e-ink displays and print. *Displays,
32*(5), 268--273.

Slattery, T. J., & Rayner, K. (2010). The influence of text legibility
on eye movements during reading. *Applied Cognitive Psychology*,
*24*(8), 1129--1148.

Slattery, T. J., & Rayner, K. (2013). Effects of intraword and interword
spacing on eye movements during reading: Exploring the optimal use of
space in a line of text. *Attention Perception & Psychophysics, 75*,
1275--1292.

Slattery, T. J., Yates, M., & Angele, B. (2016). Interword and
interletter spacing effects during reading revisited: Interactions with
word and font characteristics. *Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 22*(4), 406--422.

Sloan, L. (1959). New test charts for the measurement of visual acuity
at far and near distances. *American Journal of Opthamology, 48*(6),
807--813.

Song, H., & Schwarz, N. (2008). If it\'s hard to read, it\'s hard to do:
Processing fluency affects effort prediction and motivation.
*Psychological Science*, *19*(10), 986--988.

Song, H., & Schwarz, N. (2010). If it\'s easy to read, it\'s easy to do,
pretty, good, and true. *The Psychologist*, *23*(2), 108--111.

Spencer, H. (1968). *The visible word*. London: Royal College of Art.

Spencer, H. (1970). The future role of the printed word. In *Typographic
opportunities in the computer age: Papers of the 11th congress of the
Association Typographique Internationale* Prague, June 1969 (pp.
71--75). Prague: Typografia Prague.

Stroop, J. R. (1935/1992). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions (reprinted from Journal Experimental-Psychology, vol 18, pp.
643--662, 1935). *Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 121*(1),
15--23.

Strukelj, A., Scheiter, K., Nystrom, M., & Holmqvist, K. (2016).
Exploring the lack of a disfluency effect: Evidence from eye movements.
*Metacognition and Learning, 11*(1), 71--88.

Tannenbaum, P. H., Jacobson, H. K., & Norris, E. L. (1964). An
experimental investigation of typefaces connotations. *Journalism
Quarterly, 41*(1), 65--73.

Tejero, P., Perea, M., & Jimenéz, M. (2014). Is there a genuine
advantage to the upper part of words during lexical access? Evidence
from the Stroop task. *Memory & Cognition, 42*(5), 834--841.

Thiessen, M., Kohler, M., Churches, O., Coussens, S., & Keage, H.
(2015). Brainy type: A look at how the brain processes typographic
information. *Visible Language, 49*(1--2), 175--188.

Thompson, J. (2009). *The relationship between perceived and actual
legibility.* Unpublished BA dissertation, University of Reading, UK.

Tinker, M. A. (1928). The relative legibility of the letters, the
digits, and of certain mathematical signs. *Journal of General
Psychology*, *1*, 472--496.

Tinker, M. A. (1947). *The Tinker speed of reading test*. Minneapolis,
MN: The University of Minnesota Press.

Tinker, M. A. (1963). *Legibility of print*. Ames, Iowa: Iowa State
University Press.

Tinker, M. A. (1965). *Bases for effective reading*. Minneapolis: Lund
Press.

Tracy, W. (1982). Other replies to Donald E. Knuth\'s article. "The
concept of a meta-font". *Visible Language, 16*(4), 353--355.

Tracy, W. (1986). *Letters of credit: A view of type design*. London:
Gordon Fraser.

Twyman, M. L. (1981). Typography without words. *Visible Language,
15*(1), 5--12.

Wade, N. J., Tatler, B. W., & Heller, D. (2003). Dodge-ing the issue:
Dodge, Javal, Hering, and the measurement of saccades in eye-movement
research. *Perception, 32*(7), 793--804.

Walker, S., & Reynolds, L. (2003). Serifs, sans serifs and infant
characters in children\'s reading books. *Information Design Journal,
11*(3), 106--122.

Warde, B. (1930/2009). The crystal goblet or why printing should be
invisible. In H. Armstrong (Ed.), *Graphic design theory: readings from
the field* (pp. 39--43). New York, US: Princeton Architectural Press.

Wendt, D. (1970). By what criteria are we to judge legibility? In
*Typographic opportunities in the computer age: Papers of the 11th
congress of the Association Typographique Internationale* Prague, June
1969 (pp. 42--46). Prague: Typografia Prague.

Wertheimer, M. (1923). Untersuchungen zur Lehre von der Gestalt, ii.
*Psychologische Forschung, 4*, 301--350.

Wheildon, C. (1986). *Communicating or just making pretty shapes*.
Sydney, Australia: Newspaper Advertising Bureau of Australia Limited.

Wheildon, C. (1995). *Type & layout*. Berkeley, California: Strathmoor
Press.

Williams, T. R., & Spyridakis, J. H. (1992). Visual discriminability of
headings in text. *IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication,
35*(2), 64--70.

Williamson, H. (1983). *Methods of book design: The practice of an
industrial craft* (3rd ed.). London: Yale University Press.

Wrolstad, M. E. (1970). Methods of research into legibility and
intelligibility. In *Typographic opportunities in the computer age:
Papers of the 11th congress of the Association Typographique
Internationale* Prague, June 1969 (pp. 36--41). Prague: Typografia
Prague.

Youngman, M., & Scharff, L. (1998). Text width and margin width
influences. Paper presented at the *Southwestern Psychological
Association Conference 1998*, Retrieved 5 August 2017 from
<http://www.lieb.com/Readings/Width.pdf>.

Yu, D., Cheung, S.-H., Legge, G. E., & Chung, S. T. L. (2007). Effect of
letter spacing on visual span and reading speed. *Journal of Vision,
7*(2), 1--10.

Zachrisson, B. (1965). *Studies in the legibility of printed text*.
Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell.

Zachrisson, B. (1970). The problem of congeniality in typography. In
*Typographic opportunities in the computer age: Papers of the 11th
congress of the Association Typographique Internationale* Prague, June
1969 (pp. 47--51). Prague: Typografia Prague.

[^1]: <http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/legible>

[^2]: Visible and perceptible are used interchangeably here. Perceptible
    is a less common word but introduces the process of perception, i.e.
    that a viewer or reader is a necessary component.

[^3]: https://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/usable

[^4]: The next chapter will describe the different perspectives of
    scientists (reading researchers) and designers (practitioners).

[^5]: Corrected by this author to include the letters for researcher

[^6]: https://www.mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk/people/matt.davis/cmabridge/

[^7]: Rawlinson, G. E. (1976) The significance of letter position in
    word recognition. Unpublished PhD Thesis, Psychology Department,
    University of Nottingham, Nottingham UK.

[^8]: A review of Huey's book (Buchner, 1909) referred to the mix of
    science and practice, something which I am also aspiring to do.
    However, my text combines science (primarily psychology) with design
    practice whereas Huey focused on the practice of teaching reading.
    Nevertheless he also discusses issues of legibility.

[^9]: https://www.usability.gov/sites/default/files/documents/guidelines_book.pdf

[^10]: Based on Google scholar search, 6 November 2022

[^11]: New York Times
    (<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/19/health/19mind.html>); The
    Economist (<http://www.economist.com/node/17248892>)

[^12]: The font file can be downloaded from
    <https://github.com/denispelli/Eye-Chart-Fonts>

[^13]: https://www.cmu.edu/dietrich/sds/people/faculty/daniel-oppenheimer.html

[^14]: http://www.stern.nyu.edu/faculty/bio/adam-alter
