TODO expand to standalone items, render summary page

## Glossary

####### Anti-aliasing

A software technique which reduces jaggies which are steps where there
should be curves or straight lines. They result from the screen having a
low resolution.

####### Applied research: 

Research which aims to solve practical real-world problems.

####### Cloze procedure:

A participant is asked to identify words that have been removed from a
text which tests their ability to understand the text.

####### Cognitive load:

The mental effort being used in [working memory](#working-memory). 

####### Confounding variable:

Something which varies along with the specific variable selected for
study. As a consequence, the results cannot be reliably interpreted.
Either one or the other variable, or both, might be responsible for the
results. This affects the internal validity of the study.

####### Construct:

A way of viewing the world; a person construes or gives meaning to their
own experience.

####### Continuous text***:*** 

Sometimes referred to as 'running text', this refers to sentences
arranged in paragraphs which are designed to be read in a linear manner
and can be distinguished from lists, etc.

####### Critical print size: 

The smallest character size for which reading is possible at maximum
speed.

####### Crowding:

In the context of reading, this is the effect of surrounding letters in
words on the ease of identifying letters.

####### Desirable difficulty:

This typically describes a learning task that requires a lot of effort
to do, but this amount of effort is an advantage as it improves
performance over the longer term (e.g. retention of information). The
term was first used by Robert Bjork in 1994.

####### Developmental dyslexia: 

People diagnosed with developmental dyslexia have difficulty in reading
accurately and fluently which cannot be explained by their intellectual
ability or educational opportunities.

####### Disfluency:

The subjective (metacognitive) experience of ease or difficulty when
completing a mental task.

####### Ecological hypothesis:

In this context, a theory which proposes that we have evolved to be good
at processing certain visual signs that are found in our physical
environment.

####### Ecological validity:

The extent to which a study can be generalised to real life settings.
This is sometimes called face validity.

####### External validity:

The extent to which the results of a study can be generalized to other
situations and to other people. External refers to outside the study.

####### Internal validity: 

This is determined by how well the study has been designed to avoid
confounding variables, and describes the relationship between the
outcomes of the study and the object of study.

####### Letter frequency:

The number of times a letter appears, on average, in the language.

####### Lexical decision task:

Participant indicates whether the item is a word or not a word.

####### logMAR:

Logarithm of the Minimum Angle of Resolution

####### Manuscripts:

An author's text that has not yet been published. This was originally
handwritten but is now always a digital version.

####### Mediating: 

In the context of an experiment, mediating refers to something that is
causing the result.

####### Metacognitive experience:

This describes our awareness of what we are experiencing, such as
whether something is easy (fluent) or difficult (disfluent) to read.

####### Nominal point size:

The number given to the size of the font, even though it may not match
any dimension of the letters and varies from font to font.

####### Optotypes:

Standardised symbols for testing vision.

####### Perceptual salience:

Drawing attention, standing out, easily perceived.

####### Perceptual span:

The area around the current eye fixation position which contains useful
information: about 4 letters to the left and 15 letters to the right. We
can fully discriminate about 10 letters.

####### Practice effect:

This is a recognised effect of repeating a similar test and is usually
improvement in performance due to familiarity with the test. In research
studies, this effect is controlled by varying the order of different
conditions of the experiment across participants.

####### Priming

A technique used in psychological studies where presenting one stimulus
(e.g. part of a letter) before presenting another stimulus (e.g. whole
letter) can speed up a response.

####### Pseudoword:

A non-word that appears to be a word in the language, but isn't, e.g.
cirtion, sibrin

####### Psychophysics:

Refers to measurements using experiments which determine how reading
performance (often reading speed) is affected by physical properties of
text (e.g. type size, typeface). It is therefore measuring the
relationship between the physical and the psychological.

####### Pure research:

Also called 'basic' or 'theoretical' research, the aim is to further
develop scientific theory and understanding, as opposed to solving a
particular problem (which is the province of applied research).

####### Replicate:

If an experiment can be reproduced by different researchers, using the
same or very similar methods and materials, and the results are the
same, we can say that the study has been replicated. This is an
important means of ensuring that the research is robust.

####### Robust research:

Research which can be relied upon and can withstand changes so we can
assume that the results will apply to more than one situation.

####### Short exposure method:

Presenting a letter or word for a very brief time which increases the
sensitivity of the method.

####### Standardised test:

A standardised reading test is a device to measure reading which has
been checked for reliability and validity (see Chapter 4: Key criteria)
and is typically sold by a publisher.

####### Threshold legibility:

The smallest size that we can recognise letters and words.

####### Typographic cueing:

Use of bold, italic, underline, capitals, etc. to differentiate a word
or phrase from surrounding text.

####### Visual or vision science:

Studies of vision and how visual information is processed by people and
by computers.

####### Working memory:

A cognitive system with limited capacity where we temporarily hold
information for processing.
